IN DEFENSE 
OF FOOD 
AN EATER'S MANIFESTO 
MICHAEL POLLAN 
A U 1 II O R O I 
THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA CANADA $26.50 u.s. $21.95 
Food. There's plenty of it around, and we all love to eat it. 
So why should anyone need to defend it? 
Because most of what we're consuming today is not food, 
and how we're consuming it—in the car, in front of the 
TV, and increasingly alone—is not really eating. Instead 
of food, we're consuming "edible foodlike substances"— 
no longer the products of nature but of food science. Many 
of them come packaged with health claims that should be 
our first clue they are anything but healthy. In the so-called 
Western diet, food has been replaced by nutrients, and 
common sense by confusion. The result is what Michael 
Pollan calls the American paradox: The more we worry 
about nutrition, the less healthy we seem to become. 
But if real food—the sort of food our great grandmothers 
would recognize as food—stands in need of a defense, from 
whom does it need defending? From the food industry 
on one side and nutritional science on the other. Both 
stand to gain much from widespread confusion about 
what to eat, a question that for most of human history 
people have been able to answer without expert help. 
Yet the professionalization of eating has failed to make 
Americans healthier. Thirty years of official nutritional 
advice has only made us sicker and fatter while ruining 
countless numbers of meals. 
Pollan proposes a new (and very old) answer to the ques­
tion of what we should eat that comes down to seven 
simple but liberating words: Eat food. Not too much. 
Mostly plants. By urging us to once again eat food, he chal­
lenges the prevailing nutrient-by-nutrient approach—what 
he calls nutritionism—and proposes an alternative way 
of eating that is informed by the traditions and ecology 
(continued on back flap) 0 10 8 (continued from front flap) 
of real, well-grown, and unprocessed food. Our personal 
health, he argues, cannot be divorced from the health of 
the food chains of which we are part. 
In Defense of Food shows us how, despite the daunting 
dietary landscape Americans confront in the modern super­
market, we can escape the Western diet and, by doing so, 
most of the chronic diseases that diet causes. We can relearn 
which foods are healthy, develop simple ways to moderate 
our appetites, and return eating to its proper context—out 
of the car and back to the table. Michael Pollan's bracing 
and eloquent manifesto shows us how we can start mak­
ing thoughtful food choices that will enrich our lives, 
enlarge our sense of what it means to be healthy, and bring 
pleasure back to eating. 
Pollan's last book, The Omnivores Dilemma, launched a 
national conversation about the American way of eating; 
now In Defense of Food shows us how to change it, one 
meal at a time. 
MICHAEL POLLAN 
is the author of four previous 
books, including The Omni­
vores Dilemma and The Botany 
of Desire, both New York Times bestsellers. A longtime con­
tributor to The New York Times Magazine, he is also the 
Knight Professor of Journalism at Berkeley. To read more 
of his work, go to www.michaelpollan.com 
The 
Penguin 
Press A member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc 
375 Hudson Street, New York, N.Y. 10014 
www.penguin.com | Printed in U.S.A. PRAISE f O R 
THE OMNIVORE'S DILEMMA 
"Thoughtful, engrossing . . . you're not likely to get a better explanation 
of exactly where your food comes from." 
-THE NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW 
"An eater's manifesto . . . [Pollan's] cause is just, his thinking is clear, and 
his writing is compelling. Be careful of your dinner!" 
-THE WASHINGTON POST 
"Outstanding ... a wide-ranging invitation to think through the moral 
ramifications of our eating habits." 
—THE NEW YORKER 
"A brilliant, eye-opening account of how we produce, market and agonize 
over what we eat. If you ever thought 'What's for dinner?' was a simple 
question, you'll change your mind after reading Pollan's searing indictment 
of today's food industry." 
-THE SEATTLE TIMES 
"I have tried on countless occasions to convey to my friends how 
incredible this book is. I have gone on endlessly about Pollan's brilliance in 
finding a way to write about food—but it's not really about food, it's 
about everything. . . . Well the point is, I have tried and failed to explain 
it, so I just end up giving them a copy, and sooner or later they call 
to say, 'You were right, it's fantastic." 
-Nora Ephron, THE NEW YORK TIMES 
ISBN 978-1-59420-145-5 
52195 
781594"201455' IN DEFENSE of FOOD ALSO BY MICHAEL POLLAN 
Second Nature 
A Place of My Own 
The Botany of Desire 
The Omnivores Dilemma IN DEFENSE 
of FOOD 
AN EATER'S MANIFESTO 
MICHAEL POLLAN 
THE PENGUIN PRESS 
NewYoik « 2008 THE PENGUIN PRESS 
Published by the Penguin Group 
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A. - Penguin Group 
(Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson 
Penguin Canada Inc.) Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England • Penguin Ireland, 
25 St. Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd) * Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 
250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) « 
Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 110 017, India ° 
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New 
Zealand Ltd) « Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, 
South Africa 
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices: 
80 Strand, London WC2R ORL, England 
First published in 2008 by The Penguin Press, 
a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc. 
Copyright © Michael Pollan, 2008 
All rights reserved 
A portion of this book first appeared in The NewYoikTimes Magazine under the title "Unhappy Meals." 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING IN PUBLICATION DATA 
Pollan, Michael. 
In defense of food : an eater's manifesto / Michael Pollan. 
p. cm. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN: 978-1-59420-145-5 
1. Nutrition. 2. Food habits. I.Title. 
RA784.P643 2008 
613—dc22 2007037552 
Printed in the United States of America 
13579 10 8642 
Designed by Marysarah Quinn 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of both the copy­
right owner and the above publisher of this book. 
The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means without 
the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized electronic 
editions and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrightable materials. Your support of 
the author's rights is appreciated. FOR ANN AND GERRY, 
With gratitude for your loyal friendship 
and inspired editing CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION An Eater's Manifesto l 
I THE AGE OF NUTRITIONISM 17 
ONE – From Foods to Nutrients 19 
TWO – Nutritionism Defined 27 
THREE – Nutritionism Comes to Market 32 
FOUR – Food Science's Golden Age 36 
FIVE – The Melting of the Lipid Hypothesis 40 
six – Eat Right, Get Fatter 50 
SEVEN – Beyond the Pleasure Principle S3 
EIGHT – The Proof in the Low-Fat Pudding 58 
NINE – Bad Science 61 
TEN – Nutritionism's Children 78 
II THE WESTERN DIET AND THE 
DISEASES OF CIVILIZATION 83 
ONE – The Aborigine in All of Us 85 
TWO – The Elephant in the Room 89 THREE – The Industrialization of Eating : 
What We Do Know 101 
1) From Whole Foods to Refined 106 
2) From Complexity to Simplicity 114 
3) From Quality to Quantity 118 
4) From Leaves to Seeds 124 
5) From Food Culture to Food Science 132 
III GETTING OVER NUTRITIONISM 137 
ONE – Escape from the Western Diet 139 
TWO – Eat Food: Food Defined 147 
THREE – Mostly Plants : What to Eat 161 
FOUR – Not Too Much: How to Eat 182 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 202 
SOURCES 206 
RESOURCES 229 
INDEX 231 IN DEFENSE of FOOD INTRODUCTION « 
AN EATER'S MANIFESTO 
Eat food. Not too much. Mostly plants. 
That, more or less, is the short answer to the suppos­
edly incredibly complicated and confusing question of what 
we humans should eat in order to be maximally healthy. 
I hate to give the game away right here at the beginning 
of a whole book devoted to the subject, and I'm tempted to 
complicate matters in the interest of keeping things going for 
a couple hundred more pages or so. I'll try to resist, but will 
go ahead and add a few more details to flesh out the recom­
mendations. Like, eating a little meat isn't going to kill you, 
though it might be better approached as a side dish than as 
a main. And you're better off eating whole fresh foods rather 
than processed food products. That's what I mean by the rec­
ommendation to "eat food," which is not quite as simple as it 
sounds. For while it used to be that food was all you could eat, 
today there are thousands of other edible foodlike substances 
in the supermarket. These novel products of food science often 2 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
come in packages elaborately festooned with health claims, 
which brings me to another, somewhat counterintuitive, piece 
of advice: If you're concerned about your health, you should 
probably avoid products that make health claims. Why? Be­
cause a health claim on a food product is a strong indication 
it's not really food, and food is what you want to eat. 
You can see how quickly things can get complicated. 
I started on this quest to identify a few simple rules about 
eating after publishing The Omnivores Dilemma in 2006. Questions 
of personal health did not take center stage in that book, which 
was more concerned with the ecological and ethical dimen­
sions of our eating choices. (Though I've found that, in most 
but not all cases, the best ethical and environmental choices 
also happen to be the best choices for our health—very good 
news indeed.) But many readers wanted to know, after they'd 
spent a few hundred pages following me following the food 
chains that feed us, "Okay, but what should I eat? And now that 
you've been to the feedlots, the food-processing plants, the 
organic factory farms, and the local farms and ranches, what 
do you eat?" 
Fair questions, though it does seem to me a symptom of 
our present confusion about food that people would feel the 
need to consult a journalist, or for that matter a nutritionist or 
doctor or government food pyramid, on so basic a question 
about the conduct of our everyday lives as humans. I mean, 
what other animal needs professional help in deciding what 
it should eat? True, as omnivores—creatures that can eat just 
about anything nature has to offer and that in fact need to eat 
a wide variety of different things in order to be healthy—the AN EATER'S MANIFESTO 3 
"What to eat" question is somewhat more complicated for us 
than it is for, say, cows. Yet for most of human history, humans 
have navigated the question without expert advice. To guide us 
we had, instead, Culture, which, at least when it comes to food, 
is really just a fancy word for your mother. What to eat, how 
much of it to eat, what order in which to eat it, with what and 
when and with whom have for most of human history been a 
set of questions long setded and passed down from parents to 
children without a lot of controversy or fuss. 
But over the last several decades, mom lost much of her 
authority over the dinner menu, ceding it to scientists and 
food marketers (often an unhealthy alliance of the two) and, 
to a lesser extent, to the government, with its ever-shifting di­
etary guidelines, food-labeling rules, and perplexing pyramids. 
Think about it: Most of us no longer eat what our mothers ate 
as children or, for that matter, what our mothers fed us as chil­
dren. This is, historically speaking, an unusual state of affairs. 
My own mother grew up in the 1930s and 1940s eating a 
lot of traditional Jewish-American fare, typical of families who 
recently emigrated from Russia or Eastern Europe: stuffed cab­
bage, organ meats, cheese blintzes, kreplach, knishes stuffed 
with potato or chicken liver, and vegetables that often were 
cooked in rendered chicken or duck fat. I never ate any of 
that stuff as a kid, except when I visited my grandparents. My 
mother, an excellent and adventurous cook whose own menus 
were shaped by the cosmopolitan food trends of New York 
in the 1960s (her influences would have included the 1964 
World's Fair; Julia Child and Craig Claiborne; Manhattan res­
taurant menus of the time; and of course the rising drumbeat 4 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
of food marketing) served us a rotating menu that each week 
completed a culinary world tour: beouf bourguignon or beef 
Stroganoff on Monday; coq au vin or oven-fried chicken (in 
a Kellogg's Cornflakes crust) on Tuesday; meat loaf or Chinese 
pepper steak on Wednesday (yes, there was a lot of beef); spa­
ghetti pomodoro with Italian sausages on Thursday; and on her 
weekend nights off, a Swanson'sTV dinner or Chinese takeout. 
She cooked with Crisco or Wesson oil rather than chicken or 
duck fat and used margarine rather than butter because she'd 
absorbed the nutritional orthodoxy of the time, which held 
that these more up-to-date fats were better for our health. 
(Oops.) 
Nowadays I don't eat any of that stuff—and neither does 
my mother, who has moved on too. Her parents wouldn't rec­
ognize the foods we put on the table, except maybe the butter, 
which is back. Today in America the culture of food is chang­
ing more than once a generation, which is historically unprec­
edented—and dizzying. 
What is driving such relentless change in the American 
diet? One force is a thirty-two-billion-dollar food-marketing 
machine that thrives on change for its own sake. Another is the 
constantly shifting ground of nutrition science that, depending 
on your point of view, is steadily advancing the frontiers of our 
knowledge about diet and health or is just changing its mind 
a lot because it is a flawed science that knows much less than 
it cares to admit. Part of what drove my grandparents' food 
culture from the American table was officiai scientific opinion, 
which, beginning in the 1960s, decided that animal fat was a 
deadly substance. And then there were the food manufacturers, AN EATER'S MANIFESTO <* 5 
which stood to make very little money from my grandmother's 
cooking, because she was doing so much of it from scratch— 
up to and including rendering her own cooking fats. Amplify­
ing the "latest science," they managed to sell her daughter on 
the virtues of hydrogenated vegetable oils, the ones that we're 
now learning may be, well, deadly substances. 
Sooner or later, everything solid we've been told about the 
links between our diet and our health seems to get blown away 
in the gust of the most recent study. Consider the latest find­
ings. In 2006 came news that a low-fat diet, long believed to 
protect against cancer, may do no such thing—this from the 
massive, federally funded Women's Health Initiative, which 
has also failed to find a link between a low-fat diet and the 
risk of coronary heart disease. Indeed, the whole nutritional 
orthodoxy around dietary fat appears to be crumbling, as we 
will see. In 2005 we learned that dietary fiber might not, as 
we'd been confidently told for years, help prevent colorectal 
cancers and heart disease. And then, in the fall of 2006, two 
prestigious studies on omega-3 fats published at the same time 
came to strikingly different conclusions. While the Institute 
of Medicine at the National Academy of Sciences found little 
conclusive evidence that eating fish would do your heart much 
good (and might hurt your brain, because so much fish is con­
taminated with mercury), a Harvard study brought the hope­
ful piece of news that simply by eating a couple of servings of 
fish each week (or by downing enough fish oil tablets) you 
could cut your risk of dying from a heart attack by more than 
a third. It's no wonder that omega-3 fatty acids are poised to 
become the oat bran of our time as food scientists rush to mi-6 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
croencapsulate fish and algae oil and blast it into such formerly 
all-terrestrial foods as bread and pasta, milk and yogurt and 
cheese, all of which will soon, you can be sure, spout fishy 
new health claims. (I hope you remember the relevant rule.) 
By now you're probably feeling the cognitive dissonance of 
the supermarket shopper or science-section reader as well as 
some nostalgia for the simplicity and solidity of the first few 
words of this book. Words I'm still prepared to defend against 
the shifting winds of nutritional science and food-industry 
marketing, and will. But before I do, it's important to under­
stand how we arrived at our present state of nutritional confu­
sion and anxiety. That is the subject of the first portion of this 
book, "The Age of Nutritionism." 
The story of how the most basic questions about what to 
eat ever got so complicated reveals a great deal about the in­
stitutional imperatives of the food industry, nutrition science, 
and—ahem—journalism, three parties that stand to gain much 
from widespread confusion surrounding the most elemental 
question an omnivore confronts. But humans deciding what 
to eat without professional guidance—something they have 
been doing with notable success since coming down out of 
the trees—is seriously unprofitable if you're a food company, a 
definite career loser if you're a nutritionist, and just plain bor­
ing if you're a newspaper editor or reporter. (Or, for that mat­
ter, an eater. Who wants to hear, yet again, that you should "eat 
more fruits and vegetables"?) And so like a large gray cloud, a 
great Conspiracy of Scientific Complexity has gathered around 
the simplest questions of nutrition—much to the advantage of 
everyone involved. Except perhaps the supposed beneficiary AN EATER'S MANIFESTO *>> 7 
of all this nutritional advice: us, and our health and happi­
ness as eaters. For the most important thing to know about the 
campaign to professionalize dietary advice is that it has not 
made us any healthier. To the contrary: As I argue in part one, 
most of the nutritional advice we've received over the last half 
century (and in particular the advice to replace the fats in our 
diets with carbohydrates) has actually made us less healthy and 
considerably fatter. 
My aim in this book is to help us reclaim our health and 
happiness as eaters. To do this requires an exercise that might 
at first blush seem unnecessary, if not absurd: to offer a defense 
of food and the eating thereof. That food and eating stand in 
need of a defense might seem counterintuitive at a time when 
"overnutrition" is emerging as a more serious threat to public 
health than undernutrition. But I contend that most of what 
we're consuming today is no longer, strictly speaking, food at 
all, and how we're consuming it—in the car, in front of the 
TV, and, increasingly, alone—is not really eating, at least not in 
the sense that civilization has long understood the term. Jean-
Anthelme Brillat-Savarin, the eighteenth-century gastronomist, 
drew a useful distinction between the alimentary activity of 
animals, which "feed," and humans, who eat, or dine, a prac­
tice, he suggested, that owes as much to culture as it does to 
biology. 
But if food and eating stand in need of a defense, from 
whom, or what, do they need defending? From nutrition sci­
ence on one side and from the food industry on the other—and 
from the needless complications around eating that together 
they have fostered. As eaters we find ourselves increasingly in 8 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
the grip of a Nutritional Industrial Complex—comprised of 
well-meaning, if error-prone, scientists and food marketers 
only too eager to exploit every shift in the nutritional con­
sensus. Together, and with some crucial help from the gov­
ernment, they have constructed an ideology of nutritionism 
that, among other things, has convinced us of three pernicious 
myths: that what matters most is not the food but the "nutri­
ent"; that because nutrients are invisible and incomprehensible 
to everyone but scientists, we need expert help in deciding 
what to eat; and that the purpose of eating is to promote a 
narrow concept of physical health. Because food in this view 
is foremost a matter of biology, it follows that we must try to 
eat "scientifically"—by the nutrient and the number and under 
the guidance of experts. 
If such an approach to food doesn't strike you as the least 
bit strange, that is probably because nutritionist thinking has 
become so pervasive as to be invisible. We forget that, histori­
cally, people have eaten for a great many reasons other than 
biological necessity. Food is also about pleasure, about com­
munity, about family and spirituality, about our relationship to 
the natural world, and about expressing our identity. As long 
as humans have been taking meals together, eating has been as 
much about culture as it has been about biology. 
That eating should be foremost about bodily health is a 
relatively new and, I think, destructive idea—destructive not 
just of the pleasure of eating, which would be bad enough, 
but paradoxically of our health as well. Indeed, no people on 
earth worry more about the health consequences of their food 
choices than we Americans do—and no people suffer from AN EATER'S MANIFESTO «» 9 
as many diet-related health problems. We are becoming a na­
tion of orthorexics: people with an unhealthy obsession with 
healthy eating.* 
The scientists haven't tested the hypothesis yet, but I'm 
willing to bet that when they do they'll find an inverse cor­
relation between the amount of time people spend worrying 
about nutrition and their overall health and happiness. This is, 
after all, the implicit lesson of the French paradox, so-called 
not by the French (Quel paradoxe?) but by American nutritionists, 
who can't fathom how a people who enjoy their food as much 
as the French do, and blithely eat so many nutrients deemed 
toxic by nutritionists, could have substantially lower rates of 
heart disease than we do on our elaborately engineered low-fat 
diets. Maybe it's time we confronted the American paradox: a 
notably unhealthy population preoccupied with nutrition and 
diet and the idea of eating healthily. 
I don't mean to suggest that all would be well if we could just 
stop worrying about food or the state of our dietary health: 
Let them eat Twinkies! There are in fact some very good reasons 
to worry. The rise of nutritionism reflects legitimate concerns 
that the American diet, which is well on its way to becom­
ing the world's diet, has changed in ways that are making us 
•Orthorexia—from the Greek "ortho-" (right and correct) + "exia" (appetite) = 
right appetite. The term was first proposed in 1996 by the American physician 
Steven Bratman. Though orthorexia is not yet an eating disorder recognized 
by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, academic investigation is 
under way. 10 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
increasingly sick and fat. Four of the top ten causes of death 
today are chronic diseases with well-established links to diet: 
coronary heart disease, diabetes, stroke, and cancer.Yes, the rise 
to prominence of these chronic diseases is partly due to the 
fact that we're not dying earlier in life of infectious diseases, 
but only partly: Even after adjusting for age, many of the so-
called diseases of civilization were far less common a century 
ago—and they remain rare in places where people don't eat 
the way we do. 
I'm speaking, of course, of the elephant in the room when­
ever we discuss diet and health: "the Western diet." This is the 
subject of the second part of the book, in which I follow the 
story of the most radical change to the way humans eat since 
the discovery of agriculture. All of our uncertainties about nu­
trition should not obscure the plain fact that the chronic dis­
eases that now kill most of us can be traced directly to the 
industrialization of our food: the rise of highly processed foods 
and refined grains; the use of chemicals to raise plants and 
animals in huge monocultures; the superabundance of cheap 
calories of sugar and fat produced by modern agriculture; and 
the narrowing of the biological diversity of the human diet to a 
tiny handful of staple crops, notably wheat, corn, and soy. These 
changes have given us the Western diet that we take for granted: 
lots of processed foods and meat, lots of added fat and sugar, 
lots of everything—except vegetables, fruits, and whole grains. 
That such a diet makes people sick and fat we have known 
for a long time. Early in the twentieth century, an intrepid group 
of doctors and medical workers stationed overseas observed that AN EATER'S MANIFESTO OI 11 
wherever in the world people gave up their traditional way of 
eating and adopted the Western diet, there soon followed a pre­
dictable series of Western diseases, including obesity, diabetes, 
cardiovascular diseases, and cancer. They called these the West­
ern diseases and, though the precise causal mechanisms were 
(and remain) uncertain, these observers had litde doubt these 
chronic diseases shared a common etiology: the Western diet. 
What's more, the traditional diets that the new Western 
foods displaced were strikingly diverse: Various populations 
thrived on diets that were what we'd call high fat, low fat, or 
high carb; all meat or all plant; indeed, there have been tradi­
tional diets based on just about any kind of whole food you 
can imagine. What this suggests is that the human animal is 
well adapted to a great many different diets. The Western diet, 
however, is not one of them. 
Here, then, is a simple but crucial fact about diet and 
health, yet, curiously, it is a fact that nutritionism cannot see, 
probably because it developed in tandem with the industrial­
ization of our food and so takes it for granted. Nutritionism 
prefers to tinker with the Western diet, adjusting the various 
nutrients (lowering the fat, boosting the protein) and fortify­
ing processed foods rather than questioning their value in the 
first place. Nutritionism is, in a sense, the official ideology of 
the Western diet and so cannot be expected to raise radical or 
searching questions about it. 
But we can. By gaining a firmer grasp on the nature of the 
Western diet—trying to understand it not only physiologically 
but also historically and ecologically—we can begin to develop 12 *» IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
a different way of thinking about food that might point a path 
out of our predicament. In doing so we have two sturdy—and 
strikingly hopeful—facts to guide us: first, that humans his­
torically have been healthy eating a great many different diets; 
and second, that, as we'll see, most of the damage to our food 
and health caused by the industrialization of our eating can 
be reversed. Put simply, we can escape the Western diet and its 
consequences. 
This is the burden of the third and last section of In Defense of 
Food: to propose a couple dozen personal rules of eating that are 
conducive not only to better health but also to greater pleasure 
in eating, two goals that turn out to be mutually reinforcing. 
These recommendations are a little different from the di­
etary guidelines you're probably accustomed to. They are not, 
for example, narrowly prescriptive. I'm not interested in telling 
you what to have for dinner. No, these suggestions are more 
like eating algorithms, mental devices for thinking through our 
food choices. Because there is no single answer to the question 
of what to eat, these guidelines will produce as many different 
menus as there are people using them. 
These rules of thumb are also not framed in the vocabulary 
of nutrition science. This is not because nutrition science has 
nothing important to teach us—it does, at least when it avoids 
the pitfalls of reductionism and overconfidence—but because 
I believe we have as much, if not more, to learn about eating 
from history and culture and tradition. We are accustomed in 
all matters having to do with health to assuming science should 
have the last word, but in the case of eating, other sources AN EATER'S MANIFESTO <* 13 
of knowledge and ways of knowing can be just as powerful, 
sometimes more so. And while I inevitably rely on science 
(even reductionist science) in attempting to understand many 
questions about food and health, one of my aims in this book 
is to show the limitations of a stricdy scientific understanding 
of something as richly complex and multifaceted as food. Sci­
ence has much of value to teach us about food, and perhaps 
someday scientists will "solve" the problem of diet, creating 
the nutritionally optimal meal in a pill, but for now and the 
foreseeable future, letting the scientists decide the menu would 
be a mistake. They simply do not know enough. 
You may well, and rightly, wonder who am I to tell you 
how to eat? Here I am advising you to reject the advice of sci­
ence and industry—and then blithely go on to offer my own 
advice. So on whose authority do I purport to speak? I speak 
mainly on the authority of tradition and common sense. Most 
of what we need to know about how to eat we already know, 
or once did until we allowed the nutrition experts and the ad­
vertisers to shake our confidence in common sense, tradition, 
the testimony of our senses, and the wisdom of our mothers 
and grandmothers. 
Not that we had much choice in the matter. By the 1960s 
or so it had become all but impossible to sustain traditional 
ways of eating in the face of the industrialization of our food. 
If you wanted to eat produce grown without synthetic chemi­
cals or meat raised on pasture without pharmaceuticals, you 
were out of luck. The supermarket had become the only place 
to buy food, and real food was rapidly disappearing from its 14 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
shelves, to be replaced by the modern cornucopia of highly 
processed foodlike products. And because so many of these 
novelties deliberately lied to our senses with fake sweeteners 
and flavorings, we could no longer rely on taste or smell to 
know what we were eating. 
Most of my suggestions come down to strategies for es­
caping the Western diet, but before the resurgence of farmers' 
markets, the rise of the organic movement, and the renais­
sance of local agriculture now under way across the country, 
stepping outside the conventional food system simply was not 
a realistic option for most people. Now it is. We are entering 
a postindustrial era of food; for the first time in a generation 
it is possible to leave behind the Western diet without having 
also to leave behind civilization. And the more eaters who vote 
with their forks for a different kind of food, the more com­
monplace and accessible such food will become. Among other 
things, this book is an eater's manifesto, an invitation to join 
the movement that is renovating our food system in the name 
of health—health in the very broadest sense of that word. 
I doubt the last third of this book could have been writ­
ten forty years ago, if only because there would have been no 
way to eat the way I propose without going back to the land 
and growing all your own food. It would have been the mani­
festo of a crackpot. There was really only one kind of food on 
the national menu, and that was whatever industry and nutri­
tionism happened to be serving. Not anymore. Eaters have real 
choices now, and those choices have real consequences, for our 
health and the health of the land and the health of our food 
culture—all of which, as we will see, are inextricably linked. AN EATER'S MANIFESTO <>> IS 
That anyone should need to write a book advising people to 
"eat food" could be taken as a measure of our alienation and 
confusion. Or we can choose to see it in a more positive light 
and count ourselves fortunate indeed that there is once again 
real food for us to eat. I 
THE AGE OF 
NUTRITIONISM ONE « FROM FOODS 
TO NUTRIENTS 
If you spent any time at all in a supermarket in the 1980s, 
you might have noticed something peculiar going on. The 
food was gradually disappearing from the shelves. Not literally 
vanishing—I'm not talking about Soviet-style shortages. No, 
the shelves and refrigerated cases still groaned with packages 
and boxes and bags of various edibles, more of them landing 
every year in fact, but a great many of the traditional supermar­
ket foods were steadily being replaced by "nutrients," which 
are not the same thing. Where once the familiar names of rec­
ognizable comestibles—things like eggs or breakfast cereals or 
snack foods—claimed pride of place on the brightly colored 
packages crowding the aisles, now new, scientific-sounding 
terms like "cholesterol" and "fiber" and "saturated fat" began 
rising to large-type prominence. More important than mere 
foods, the presence or absence of these invisible substances was 
now generally believed to confer health benefits on their eat­
ers. The implicit message was that foods, by comparison, were 
coarse, old-fashioned, and decidedly unscientific things—who 20 <* IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
could say what was in them really? But nutrients—those chemi­
cal compounds and minerals in foods that scientists have iden­
tified as important to our health—gleamed with the promise 
of scientific certainty Eat more of the right ones, fewer of the 
wrong, and you would live longer, avoid chronic diseases, and 
lose weight. 
Nutrients themselves had been around as a concept and 
a set of words since early in the nineteenth century. That was 
when William Prout, an English doctor and chemist, identi­
fied the three principal constituents of food—protein, fat, and 
carbohydrates—that would come to be known as macronutri-
ents. Building on Prout s discovery, Justus von Liebig, the great 
German scientist credited as one of the founders of organic 
chemistry, added a couple of minerals to the big three and de­
clared that the mystery of animal nutrition—how food turns 
into flesh and energy—had been solved. This is the very same 
Liebig who identified the macronutrients in soil—nitrogen, 
phosphorus, and potassium (known to farmers and gardeners 
by their periodic table initials, N, P, and K). Liebig claimed that 
all that plants need to live and grow are these three chemicals, 
period. As with the plant, so with the person: In 1842, Liebig 
proposed a theory of metabolism that explained life strictly 
in terms of a small handful of chemical nutrients, without re­
course to metaphysical forces such as "vitalism." 
Having cracked the mystery of human nutrition, Liebig 
went on to develop a meat extract—Liebig's Extractum Car-
nis—that has come down to us as bouillon and concocted 
the first baby formula, consisting of cow's milk, wheat flour, 
malted flour, and potassium bicarbonate. FROM FOODS TO NUTRIENTS « 21 
Liebig, the father of modern nutritional science, had driven 
food into a corner and forced it to yield its chemical secrets. 
But the post-Liebig consensus that science now pretty much 
knew what was going on in food didn't last long. Doctors 
began to notice that many of the babies fed exclusively on 
Liebig's formula failed to thrive. (Not surprising, given that 
his preparation lacked any vitamins or several essential fats and 
amino acids.) That Liebig might have overlooked a few little 
things in food also began to occur to doctors who observed 
that sailors on long ocean voyages often got sick, even when 
they had adequate supplies of protein, carbohydrates, and fat. 
Clearly the chemists were missing something—some essential 
ingredients present in the fresh plant foods (like oranges and 
potatoes) that miraculously cured the sailors. This observation 
led to the discovery early in the twentieth century of the first 
set of micronutrients, which the Polish biochemist Casimir 
Funk, harkening back to older vitalist ideas of food, christened 
"vitamines" in 1912 ("vita-" for life and "-amines" for organic 
compounds organized around nitrogen). 
Vitamins did a lot for the prestige of nutritional science. 
These special molecules, which at first were isolated from 
foods and then later synthesized in a laboratory, could cure 
people of nutritional deficiencies such as scurvy or beriberi 
almost overnight in a convincing demonstration of reductive 
chemistry's power. Beginning in the 1920s, vitamins enjoyed 
a vogue among the middle class, a group not notably afflicted 
by beriberi or scurvy. But the belief took hold that these magic 
molecules also promoted growth in children, long life in 
adults, and, in a phrase of the time, "positive health" in every-22 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
one. (And what would "negative health" be exactly?) Vitamins 
had brought a kind of glamour to the science of nutrition, and 
though certain elite segments of the population now began to 
eat by its expert lights, it really wasn't until late in the twen­
tieth century that nutrients began to push food aside in the 
popular imagination of what it means to eat. 
No single event marked the shift from eating food to eat­
ing nutrients, although in retrospect a little-noticed political 
dustup in Washington in 1977 seems to have helped propel 
American culture down this unfortunate and dimly lighted 
path. Responding to reports of an alarming increase in chronic 
diseases linked to diet—including heart disease, cancer, obe­
sity, and diabetes—the Senate Select Committee on Nutrition 
and Human Needs chaired by South Dakota Senator George 
McGovern held hearings on the problem. The committee had 
been formed in 1968 with a mandate to eliminate malnutri­
tion, and its work had led to the establishment of several im­
portant food-assistance programs. Endeavoring now to resolve 
the question of diet and chronic disease in the general popula­
tion represented a certain amount of mission creep, but all in 
a good cause to which no one could possibly object. 
After taking two days of testimony on diet and killer dis­
eases, the committee's staff—comprised not of scientists or 
doctors but of lawyers and (ahem) journalists—set to work 
preparing what it had every reason to assume would be an 
uncontroversial document called Dietary Goals for the United States. 
The committee learned that while rates of coronary heart dis­
ease had soared in America since World War II, certain other 
cultures that consumed traditional diets based mostly on plants FROM FOODS TO NUTRIENTS <>> 23 
had strikingly low rates of chronic diseases. Epidemiologists 
had also observed that in America during the war years, when 
meat and dairy products were strictly rationed, the rate of heart 
disease had temporarily plummeted, only to leap upward once 
the war was over. 
Beginning in the 1950s, a growing body of scientific opin­
ion held that the consumption of fat and dietary cholesterol, 
much of which came from meat and dairy products, was re­
sponsible for rising rates of heart disease during the twentieth 
century. The "lipid hypothesis," as it was called, had already 
been embraced by the American Heart Association, which in 
1961 had begun recommending a "prudent diet" low in sat­
urated fat and cholesterol from animal products. True, actual 
proof for the lipid hypothesis was remarkably thin in 19 7 7—it 
was still very much a hypothesis, but one well on its way to 
general acceptance. 
In January 1977, the committee issued a fairly straight­
forward set of dietary guidelines, calling on Americans to cut 
down on their consumption of red meat and dairy products. 
Within weeks a firestorm of criticism, emanating chiefly from 
the red meat and dairy industries, engulfed the committee, 
and Senator McGovern (who had a great many cattle ranch­
ers among his South Dakota constituents) was forced to beat 
a retreat. The committee's recommendations were hastily re­
written. Plain talk about actual foodstuffs—the committee had 
advised Americans to "reduce consumption of meat"—was re­
placed by artful compromise: "choose meats, poultry, and fish 
that will reduce saturated fat intake." 
Leave aside for now the virtues, if any, of a low-meat and/or 24 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
low-fat diet, questions to which I will return, and focus for 
a moment on language. For with these subtle changes in 
wording a whole way of thinking about food and health un­
derwent a momentous shift. First, notice that the stark mes­
sage to "eat less" of a particular food—in this case meat—had 
been deep-sixed; don't look for it ever again in any official 
U.S. government dietary pronouncement. Say what you will 
about this or that food, you are not allowed officially to tell 
people to eat less of it or the industry in question will have you 
for lunch. But there is a path around this immovable obstacle, 
and it was McGovern's staffers who blazed it: Speak no more of 
foods, only nutrients. Notice how in the revised guidelines, distinc­
tions between entities as different as beef and chicken and fish 
have collapsed. These three venerable foods, each representing 
not just a different species but an entirely different taxonomic 
class, are now lumped together as mere delivery systems for a 
single nutrient. Notice too how the new language exonerates 
the foods themselves. Now the culprit is an obscure, invisible, 
tasteless—and politically unconnected—substance that may or 
may not lurk in them called saturated fat. 
The linguistic capitulation did nothing to rescue McGovern 
from his blunder. In the very next election, in 1980, the beef 
lobby succeeded in rusticating the three-term senator, send­
ing an unmistakable warning to anyone who would challenge 
the American diet, and in particular the big chunk of animal 
protein squatting in the middle of its plate. Henceforth, gov­
ernment dietary guidelines would shun plain talk about whole 
foods, each of which has its trade association on Capitol Hill, 
but would instead arrive dressed in scientific euphemism and FROM FOODS TO NUTRIENTS «1 25 
speaking of nutrients, entities that few Americans (including, 
as we would find out, American nutrition scientists) really un­
derstood but that, with the notable exception of sucrose, lack 
powerful lobbies in Washington.* 
The lesson of the McGovern fiasco was quickly absorbed 
by all who would pronounce on the American diet. When a 
few years later the National Academy of Sciences looked into 
the question of diet and cancer, it was careful to frame its rec­
ommendations nutrient by nutrient rather than food by food, 
to avoid offending any powerful interests. We now know the 
academy's panel of thirteen scientists adopted this approach 
over the objections of at least two of its members who argued 
that most of the available science pointed toward conclusions 
about foods, not nutrients. According to T. Colin Campbell, a 
Cornell nutritional biochemist who served on the panel, all 
of the human population studies linking dietary fat to can­
cer actually showed that the groups with higher cancer rates 
consumed not just more fats, but also more animal foods and 
fewer plant foods as well. "This meant that these cancers could 
*Sucrose is the exception that proves the rule. Only the power of the sugar 
lobby in Washington can explain the fact that the official U.S. recommendation 
for the maximum permissible level of free sugars in the diet is an eye-popping 
25 percent of daily calories. To give you some idea just how permissive that is, 
the World Health Organization recommends that no more than 10 percent of 
daily calories come from added sugars, a benchmark that the U.S. sugar lobby 
has worked furiously to dismantle. In 2004 it enlisted the Bush State 
Department in a campaign to get the recommendation changed and has 
threatened to lobby Congress to cut WHO funding unless the organization 
recants. Perhaps we should be grateful that the saturated fat interests have as 
yet organized no such lobby. 26 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
just as easily be caused by animal protein, dietary cholesterol, 
something else exclusively found in animal-based foods, or 
a lack of plant-based foods," Campbell wrote years later. The 
argument fell on deaf ears. 
In the case of the "good foods" too, nutrients also carried 
the day: The language of the final report highlighted the ben­
efits of the antioxidants in vegetables rather than the vegetables 
themselves. Joan Gussow, a Columbia University nutritionist 
who served on the panel, argued against the focus on nutrients 
rather than whole foods. "The really important message in the 
epidemiology, which is all we had to go on, was that some 
vegetables and citrus fruits seemed to be protective against 
cancer. But those sections of the report were written as though 
it was the vitamin C in the citrus or the beta-carotene in the 
vegetables that was responsible for the effect. I kept changing 
the language to talk about 'foods that contain vitamin C and 'foods 
that contain carotenes.' Because how do you know it's not one of 
the other things in the carrots or the broccoli? There are hun­
dreds of carotenes. But the biochemists had their answer: 'You 
can't do a trial on broccoli.' " 
So the nutrients won out over the foods. The panel's resort 
to scientific reductionism had the considerable virtue of being 
both politically expedient (in the case of meat and dairy) and, 
to these scientific heirs of Justus von Liebig, intellectually sym­
pathetic. With each of its chapters focused on a single nutri­
ent, the final draft of the National Academy of Sciences report, 
Diet, Nutrition and Cancer, framed its recommendations in terms of 
saturated fats and antioxidants rather than beef and broccoli. 
In doing so, the 1982 National Academy of Sciences report NUTRITIONISM DEFINED <« 27 
helped codify the officiai new dietary language, the one we all 
still speak. Industry and media soon followed suit, and terms 
like polyunsaturated, cholesterol, monounsaturated, carbohydrate, fiber, polyphe­
nols, amino acids, flavonols, carotenoids, antioxidants, probiotics, and phyto-
chemicals soon colonized much of the cultural space previously 
occupied by the tangible material formerly known as food. 
The Age of Nutritionism had arrived. 
he term isn't mine. It was coined by an Australian sociolo-
JL gist of science by the name of Gyorgy Scrinis, and as near 
as I can determine first appeared in a 2002 essay titled "Sorry 
Marge" published in an Australian quarterly called Meanjin. 
"Sorry Marge" looked at margarine as the ultimate nutritionist 
product, able to shift its identity (no cholesterol! one year, no trans 
fats! the next) depending on the prevailing winds of dietary 
opinion. But Scrinis had bigger game in his sights than spread-
able vegetable oil. He suggested that we look past the various 
nutritional claims swirling around margarine and butter and 
consider the underlying message of the debate itself: "namely, 
that we should understand and engage with food and our bod­
ies in terms of their nutritional and chemical constituents and 
requirements—the assumption being that this is all we need to TWO « NUTRITIONISM 
DEFINED 28 <>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
understand." This reductionist way of thinking about food had 
been pointed out and criticized before (notably by the Cana­
dian historian Harvey Levenstein, the British nutritionist Geof­
frey Cannon, and the American nutritionists Joan Gussow and 
Marion Nestle), but it had never before been given a proper 
name: "nutritionism." Proper names have a way of making vis­
ible things we don't easily see or simply take for granted. 
The first thing to understand about nutritionism is that it 
is not the same thing as nutrition. As the "-ism" suggests, it 
is not a scientific subject but an ideology. Ideologies are ways 
of organizing large swaths of life and experience under a set 
of shared but unexamined assumptions. This quality makes an 
ideology particularly hard to see, at least while it's still exerting 
its hold on your culture. A reigning ideology is a little like the 
weather—all pervasive and so virtually impossible to escape. 
Still, we can try. 
In the case of nutritionism, the widely shared but unex­
amined assumption is that the key to understanding food is 
indeed the nutrient. Put another way: Foods are essentially the 
sum of their nutrient parts. From this basic premise flow sev­
eral others. 
Since nutrients, as compared with foods, are invisible and 
therefore slightly mysterious, it falls to the scientists (and to 
the journalists through whom the scientists reach the public) 
to explain the hidden reality of foods to us. In form this is a 
quasireligious idea, suggesting the visible world is not the one 
that really matters, which implies the need for a priesthood. 
For to enter a world where your dietary salvation depends on 
unseen nutrients, you need plenty of expert help. NUTRITIONISM DEFINED <» 29 
But expert help to do what exactly? This brings us to an­
other unexamined assumption of nutritionism: that the whole 
point of eating is to maintain and promote bodily health. Hip­
pocrates' famous injunction to "let food be thy medicine" is 
ritually invoked to support this notion. I'll leave the prem­
ise alone for now, except to point out that it is not shared 
by all cultures and, further, that the experience of these other 
cultures suggests that, paradoxically, regarding food as being 
about things other than bodily health—like pleasure, say, or 
sociality or identity—makes people no less healthy; indeed, 
there's some reason to believe it may make them more healthy. 
This is what we usually have in mind when we speak of the 
French paradox. So there is at least a question as to whether the 
ideology of nutritionism is actually any good for you. 
It follows from the premise that food is foremost about 
promoting physical health that the nutrients in food should be 
divided into the healthy ones and the unhealthy ones—good 
nutrients and bad. This has been a hallmark of nutritionist 
thinking from the days of Liebig, for whom it wasn't enough 
to identify the nutrients; he also had to pick favorites, and nu­
tritionists have been doing so ever since. Liebig claimed that 
protein was the "master nutrient" in animal nutrition, because 
he believed it drove growth. Indeed, he likened the role of 
protein in animals to that of nitrogen in plants: Protein (which 
contains nitrogen) comprised the essential human fertilizer. 
Liebig's elevation of protein dominated nutritionist thinking 
for decades as public health authorities worked to expand ac­
cess to and production of the master nutrient (especially in 
the form of animal protein), with the goal of growing big-30 *» IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
ger, and therefore (it was assumed) healthier, people. (A high 
priority for Western governments fighting imperial wars.) To 
a considerable extent we still have a food system organized 
around the promotion of protein as the master nutrient. It has 
given us, among other things, vast amounts of cheap meat and 
milk, which have in turn given us much, much bigger people. 
Whether they are healthier too is another question. 
It seems to be a rule of nutritionism that for every good 
nutrient, there must be a bad nutrient to serve as its foil, the 
latter a focus for our food fears and the former for our enthu­
siasms. A backlash against protein arose in America at the turn 
of the last century as diet gurus like John Harvey Kellogg and 
Horace Fletcher (about whom more later) railed against the 
deleterious effects of protein on digestion (it supposedly led 
to the proliferation of toxic bacteria in the gut) and promoted 
the cleaner, more wholesome carbohydrate in its place. The 
legacy of that revaluation is the breakfast cereal, the strate­
gic objective of which was to dethrone animal protein at the 
morning meal. 
Ever since, the history of modern nutritionism has been a 
history of macronutrients at war: protein against carbs; carbs 
against proteins, and then fats; fats against carbs. Beginning 
with Liebig, in each age nutritionism has organized most of its 
energies around an imperial nutrient: protein in the nineteenth 
century, fat in the twentieth, and, it stands to reason, carbohy­
drates will occupy our attention in the twenty-first. Meanwhile, 
in the shadow of these titanic struggles, smaller civil wars have 
raged within the sprawling empires of the big three: refined 
carbohydrates versus fiber; animal protein versus plant protein; NUTRITIONISM DEFINED Oi 31 
saturated fats versus polyunsaturated fats; and then, deep down 
within the province of the polyunsaturates, omega-3 fatty acids 
versus omega-6s. Like so many ideologies, nutritionism at bot­
tom hinges on a form of dualism, so that at all times there 
must be an evil nutrient for adherents to excoriate and a savior 
nutrient for them to sanctify At the moment, trans fats are per­
forming admirably in the former role, omega-3 fatty acids in 
the latter. It goes without saying that such a Manichaean view of 
nutrition is bound to promote food fads and phobias and large 
abrupt swings of the nutritional pendulum. 
Another potentially serious weakness of nutritionist ideol­
ogy is that, focused so relentlessly as it is on the nutrients it 
can measure, it has trouble discerning qualitative distinctions 
among foods. So fish, beef, and chicken through the nutrition­
ist's lens become mere delivery systems for varying quantities 
of different fats and proteins and whatever other nutrients hap­
pen to be on their scope. Milk through this lens is reduced to a 
suspension of protein, lactose, fats, and calcium in water, when 
it is entirely possible that the benefits, or for that matter the 
hazards, of drinking milk owe to entirely other factors (growth 
hormones?) or relationships between factors (fat-soluble vita­
mins and saturated fat?) that have been overlooked. Milk re­
mains a food of humbling complexity, to judge by the long, 
sorry saga of efforts to simulate it. The entire history of baby 
formula has been the history of one overlooked nutrient after 
another: Liebig missed the vitamins and amino acids, and his 
successors missed the omega-3s, and still to this day babies fed 
on the most "nutritionally complete" formula fail to do as well 
as babies fed human milk. Even more than margarine, infant 32 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
formula stands as the ultimate test product of nutritionism and 
a fair index of its hubris. 
This brings us to one of the most troubling features of nu­
tritionism, though it is a feature certainly not troubling to all. 
When the emphasis is on quantifying the nutrients contained 
in foods (or, to be precise, the recognized nutrients in foods), 
any qualitative distinction between whole foods and processed 
foods is apt to disappear. "[If] foods are understood only in 
terms of the various quantities of nutrients they contain," Gy-
orgy Scrinis wrote, then "even processed foods may be consid­
ered to be 'healthier' for you than whole foods if they contain 
the appropriate quantities of some nutrients." 
How convenient. 
THREE « NUTRITIONISM COMES 
TO MARKET 
o idea could be more sympathetic to manufacturers of 
JL \| processed foods, which surely explains why they have 
been so happy to jump on the nutritionism bandwagon. In­
deed, nutritionism supplies the ultimate justification for pro­
cessing food by implying that with a judicious application of 
food science, fake foods can be made even more nutritious 
than the real thing. This of course is the story of margarine, 
the first important synthetic food to slip into our diet. Mar-NUTRITIONISM COMES TO MARKET « 33 
garine started out in the nineteenth century as a cheap and 
inferior substitute for butter, but with the emergence of the 
lipid hypothesis in the 1950s, manufacturers quickly figured 
out that their product, with some tinkering, could be mar­
keted as better—smarter!—than butter: butter with the bad 
nutrients removed (cholesterol and saturated fats) and replaced 
with good nutrients (polyunsaturated fats and then vitamins). 
Every time margarine was found wanting, the wanted nutrient 
could simply be added (Vitamin D? Got it now. Vitamin A? Sure, 
no problem). But of course margarine, being the product not of 
nature but of human ingenuity, could never be any smarter 
than the nutritionists dictating its recipe, and the nutritionists 
turned out to be not nearly as smart as they thought. The food 
scientists' ingenious method for making healthy vegetable oil 
solid at room temperature—by blasting it with hydrogen— 
turned out to produce unhealthy trans fats, fats that we now 
know are more dangerous than the saturated fats they were 
designed to replace. Yet the beauty of a processed food like 
margarine is that it can be endlessly reengineered to overcome 
even the most embarrassing about-face in nutritional think­
ing—including the real wincer that its main ingredient might 
cause heart attacks and cancer. So now the trans fats are gone, 
and margarine marches on, unfazed and apparently unkillable. 
Too bad the same cannot be said of an unknown number of 
margarine eaters. 
By now we have become so inured to fake foods that we 
forget what a difficult trail margarine had to blaze before it 
and other synthetic food products could win government and 
consumer acceptance. At least since the 1906 publication of 34 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
Upton Sinclair's The Jungle, the "adulteration" of common foods 
has been a serious concern of the eating public and the target 
of numerous federal laws and Food and Drug Administration 
regulations. Many consumers regarded "oleomargarine" as just 
such an adulteration, and in the late 1800s five states passed 
laws requiring that all butter imitations be dyed pink so no one 
would be fooled. The Supreme Court struck down the laws in 
1898. In retrospect, had the practice survived, it might have 
saved some lives. 
The 1938 Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act imposed strict 
rules requiring that the word "imitation" appear on any food 
product that was, well, an imitation. Read today, the official 
rationale behind the imitation rule seems at once commonsen-
sical and quaint: "... there are certain traditional foods that ev­
eryone knows, such as bread, milk and cheese, and that when 
consumers buy these foods, they should get the foods they are 
expecting . .. [and] if a food resembles a standardized food but 
does not comply with the standard, that food must be labeled 
as an 'imitation.' " 
Hard to argue with that.. . but the food industry did, stren­
uously for decades, and in 1973 it finally succeeded in getting 
the imitation rule tossed out, a little-noticed but momentous 
step that helped speed America down the path to nutritionism. 
Industry hated the imitation rule. There had been such a 
tawdry history of adulterated foods and related forms of snake 
oil in American commerce that slapping the word "imitation" 
on a food product was the kiss of death—an admission of adul­
teration and inferiority. By the 1960s and 1970s, the require­
ment that such a pejorative term appear on fake food packages NUTRITIONISM COMES TO MARKET « 35 
stood in the way of innovation, indeed of the wholesale refor­
mulation of the American food supply—a project that, in the 
wake of rising concerns about dietary fat and cholesterol, was 
coming to be seen as a good thing. What had been regarded as 
hucksterism and fraud in 1906 had begun to look like sound 
public health policy by 1973. The American Heart Association, 
eager to get Americans off saturated fats and onto vegetable 
oils (including hydrogenated vegetable oils), was actively en­
couraging the food industry to "modify" various foods to get 
the saturated fats and cholesterol out of them, and in the early 
seventies the association urged that "any existing and regula­
tory barriers to the marketing of such foods be removed." 
And so they were when, in 1973, the FDA (not, note, the 
Congress that wrote the law) simply repealed the 1938 rule 
concerning imitation foods. It buried the change in a set of 
new, seemingly consumer-friendly rules about nutrient label­
ing so that news of the imitation rule's repeal did not appear 
until the twenty-seventh paragraph of The NewYorkTimes' account, 
published under the headline F.D.A. PROPOSES SWEEPING CHANGE IN 
FOOD LABELING: NEW RULES DESIGNED TO GIVE CONSUMERS A BETTER IDEA OF 
NUTRITIONAL VALUE. (The second deck of the headline gave away 
the game: PROCESSORS BACK MOVE.) The revised imitation rule held 
that as long as an imitation product was not "nutritionally infe­
rior" to the natural food it sought to impersonate—as long as 
it had the same quantities of recognized nutrients—the imita­
tion could be marketed without using the dreaded "i" word. 
With that, the regulatory door was thrown open to all man­
ner of faked low-fat products: Fats in things like sour cream and 
yogurt could now be replaced with hydrogenated oils or guar 36 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
gum or carrageenan, bacon bits could be replaced with soy 
protein, the cream in "whipped cream" and "coffee creamer" 
could be replaced with corn starch, and the yolks of liquefied 
eggs could be replaced with, well, whatever the food scientists 
could dream up, because the sky was now the limit. As long as 
the new fake foods were engineered to be nutritionally equiva­
lent to the real article, they could no longer be considered fake. 
Of course the operative nutritionist assumption here is that we 
know enough to determine nutritional equivalence—some­
thing that the checkered history of baby formula suggests has 
never been the case. 
Nutritionism had become the official ideology of the Food 
and Drug Administration; for all practical purposes the govern­
ment had redefined foods as nothing more than the sum of 
their recognized nutrients. Adulteration had been repositioned 
as food science. All it would take now was a push from McGov-
ern's Dietary Goals for hundreds of "traditional foods that every­
one knows" to begin their long retreat from the supermarket 
shelves and for our eating to become more "scientific." 
FOUR « FOOD SCIENCE'S 
GOLDEN AGE 
In the years following the 1977 Dietary Goals and the 1982 
National Academy of Sciences report on diet and cancer, 
the food industry, armed with its regulatory absolution, set FOOD SCIENCE'S GOLDEN AGE <>> 37 
about reengineering thousands of popular food products to 
contain more of the nutrients that science and government 
had deemed the good ones and fewer of the bad. A golden age 
for food science dawned. Hyphens sprouted like dandelions 
in the supermarket aisles: low-fat, no-cholesterol, high-fiber. Ingre­
dients labels on formerly two- or three-ingredient foods such 
as mayonnaise and bread and yogurt ballooned with lengthy 
lists of new additives—what in a more benighted age would 
have been called adulterants. The Year of Eating Oat Bran—also 
known as 1988—served as a kind of coming-out party for the 
food scientists, who succeeded in getting the material into 
nearly every processed food sold in America. Oat bran's mo­
ment on the dietary stage didn't last long, but the pattern 
now was set, and every few years since then, a new oat bran 
has taken its star turn under the marketing lights. (Here come 
omega-3s!) 
You would not think that common food animals could 
themselves be rejiggered to fit nutritionist fashion, but in fact 
some of them could be, and were, in response to the 1977 and 
1982 dietary guidelines as animal scientists figured out how to 
breed leaner pigs and select for leaner beef. With widespread 
lipophobia taking hold of the human population, countless 
cattle lost their marbling and lean pork was repositioned as 
"the new white meat"—tasteless and tough as running shoes, 
perhaps, but now even a pork chop could compete with 
chicken as a way for eaters to "reduce saturated fat intake." In 
the years since then, egg producers figured out a clever way to 
redeem even the disreputable egg: By feeding flaxseed to hens, 
they could elevate levels of omega-3 fatty acids in the yolks. 38 «» IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
Aiming to do the same thing for pork and beef fat, the animal 
scientists are now at work genetically engineering omega-3 
fatty acids into pigs and persuading cattle to lunch on flaxseed 
in the hope of introducing the blessed fish fat where it had 
never gone before: into hot dogs and hamburgers. 
But these whole foods are the exceptions. The typical whole 
food has much more trouble competing under the rules of 
nutritionism, if only because something like a banana or an 
avocado can't quite as readily change its nutritional stripes. 
(Though rest assured the genetic engineers are hard at work 
on the problem.) To date, at least, they can't put oat bran in 
a banana or omega-3s in a peach. So depending on the reign­
ing nutritional orthodoxy, the avocado might either be a 
high-fat food to be assiduously avoided (Old Think) or a food 
high in monounsaturated fat to be embraced (New Think). 
The fate and supermarket sales of each whole food rises and 
falls with every change in the nutritional weather while the 
processed foods simply get reformulated and differently 
supplemented. That's why when the Atkins diet storm hit the 
food industry in 2003, bread and pasta got a quick rede­
sign (dialing back the carbs; boosting the proteins) while 
poor unreconstructed potatoes and carrots were left out in 
the carbohydrate cold. (The low-carb indignities visited on 
bread and pasta, two formerly "traditional foods that every­
one knows," would never have been possible had the imita­
tion rule not been tossed out in 1973. Who would ever buy 
imitation spaghetti? But of course that is precisely what low-
carb pasta is.) 
A handful of lucky whole foods have recently gotten the FOOD SCIENCE'S GOLDEN AGE <* 39 
"good nutrient" marketing treatment: The antioxidants in the 
pomegranate (a fruit formerly more trouble to eat than it was 
worth) now protect against cancer and erectile dysfunction, 
apparently, and the omega-3 fatty acids in the (formerly just 
fattening) walnut ward off heart disease. A whole subcategory 
of nutritional science—funded by industry and, according to 
one recent analysis,* remarkably reliable in its ability to find 
a health benefit in whatever food it has been commissioned 
to study—has sprung up to give a nutritionist sheen—(and 
FDA-approved health claim) to all sorts of foods, including 
some not ordinarily thought of as healthy. The Mars Corpora­
tion recently endowed a chair in chocolate science at the Uni­
versity of California at Davis, where research on the antioxidant 
properties of cacao is making breakthroughs, so it shouldn't 
be long before we see chocolate bars bearing FDA-approved 
health claims. (When we do, nutritionism will surely have en­
tered its baroque phase.) Fortunately for everyone playing this 
game, scientists can find an antioxidant in just about any plant-
based food they choose to study. 
Yet as a general rule it's a whole lot easier to slap a health 
claim on a box of sugary cereal than on a raw potato or a 
carrot, with the perverse result that the most healthful foods 
in the supermarket sit there quietly in the produce section, 
silent as stroke victims, while a few aisles over in Cereal the 
*L. I. Lesser, C. B. Ebbeling, M. Goozner, D. Wypij, and D. S. Ludwig, "Rela­
tionship Between Funding Source and Conclusion Among Nutrition-Related 
Scientific Articles," PLoS Medicine, Vol. 4, No. 1, e5 doi: 10.1371 /journal. 
pmed.0040005. 40 O) IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
Cocoa Puffs and Lucky Charms are screaming their newfound 
"whole-grain goodness" to the rafters. 
Watch out for those health claims. 
FIVE « THE MELTING OF THE 
LIPID HYPOTHESIS 
JL \| for us? You might think that a national fixation on nutri­
ents would lead to measurable improvements in public health. 
For that to happen, however, the underlying nutritional science 
and the policy recommendations (not to mention the journal­
ism) based on that science would both have to be sound. This 
has seldom been the case. 
The most important such nutrition campaign has been the 
thirty-year effort to reform the food supply and our eating 
habits in light of the lipid hypothesis—the idea that dietary 
fat is responsible for chronic disease. At the behest of govern­
ment panels, nutrition scientists, and public health officials, 
we have dramatically changed the way we eat and the way we 
think about food, in what stands as the biggest experiment in 
applied nutritionism in history. Thirty years later, we have good 
reason to believe that putting the nutritionists in charge of the 
menu and the kitchen has not only ruined an untold number utritionism is good for the food business. But is it good THE MELTING OF THE LIPID HYPOTHESIS 41 
of meals, but also has done little for our health, except very 
possibly to make it worse. 
These are strong words, I know. Here are a couple more: 
What the Soviet Union was to the ideology of Marxism, the 
Low-Fat Campaign is to the ideology of nutritionism—its su­
preme test and, as now is coming clear, its most abject failure. 
You can argue, as some diehards will do, that the problem was 
one of faulty execution or you can accept that the underly­
ing tenets of the ideology contained the seeds of the eventual 
disaster. 
At this point you're probably saying to yourself, Hold on just 
a minute. Are you really saying the whole low-fat deal was bogus? But my su­
permarket is still packed with low-fat this and no-cholesterol that! My doctor 
is still on me about my cholesterol and telling me to switch to low-fat every­
thing. I was flabbergasted at the news too, because no one in 
charge—not in the government, not in the public health com­
munity—has dared to come out and announce: Urn, you know 
everything we've been telling you for the last thirty years about the links between 
dietary fat and heart disease? And fat and cancer? And fat and fat? Well, this just 
in: It now appears that none of it was true.We sincerely regret the error. 
No, the admissions of error have been muffled, and the 
mea culpas impossible to find. But read around in the recent 
scientific literature and you will find a great many scientists 
beating a quiet retreat from the main tenets of the lipid hy­
pothesis. Let me offer just one example, an article from a group 
of prominent nutrition scientists at the Harvard School of Pub­
lic Health. In a recent review of the relevant research called 
"Types of Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart Disease: A 42 0> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
Critical Review,"* the authors proceed to calmly remove, one 
by one, just about every strut supporting the theory that di­
etary fat causes heart disease. 
Hu and his colleagues begin with a brief, uninflected sum­
mary of the lipophobic era that is noteworthy mostly for cast­
ing the episode in the historical past: 
During the past several decades, reduction in fat 
intake has been the main focus of national 
dietary recommendations. In the public's mind, the 
words "dietary fat" have become synonymous with 
obesity and heart disease, whereas the words 
"low-fat" and "fat-free" have been synonymous 
with heart health. 
We can only wonder how in the world such crazy ideas 
ever found their way into the "public's mind." Surely not 
from anyone associated with the Harvard School of Public 
Health, I would hope. Well, as it turns out, the selfsame group, 
formerly in thrall to the lipid hypothesis, was recommending 
until the early 1990s, when the evidence about the dangers 
of trans fats could no longer be ignored, that people reduce 
their saturated fat intake by switching from butter to marga­
rine. (Though red flags about trans fats can be spotted as far 
back as 1956, when Ancel Keyes, the father of the lipid hy­
pothesis, suggested that rising consumption of hydrogenated 
*Frank B. Hu, et al., Journal of the .American College of Nutrition, Vol. 20, 1, 5-19 
(2001). THE MELTING OF THE LIPID HYPOTHESIS « 43 
vegetable oils might be responsible for the twentieth-century 
rise in coronary heart disease.) 
But back to the critical review, which in its second para­
graph drops this bombshell: 
It is now increasingly recognized that the low-fat 
campaign has been based on little scientific 
evidence and may have caused unintended health 
consequences. 
Say what? 
The article then goes on blandly to survey the crumbling 
foundations of the lipid hypothesis, circa 2001 : Only two stud­
ies have ever found "a significant positive association between 
saturated fat intake and risk of CHD [coronary heart disease]"; 
many more have failed to find an association. Only one study 
has ever found "a significant inverse association between poly­
unsaturated fat intake and CHD." Let me translate: The amount 
of saturated fat in the diet probably may have little if any bear­
ing on the risk of heart disease, and evidence that increasing 
polyunsaturated fats in the diet will reduce risk is slim to nil. 
As for the dangers of dietary cholesterol, the review found "a 
weak and nonsignificant positive association between dietary 
cholesterol and risk of CHD." (Someone should tell the food 
processors, who continue to treat dietary cholesterol as a mat­
ter of life and death.) "Surprisingly," the authors wrote, "there 
is little direct evidence linking higher egg consumption and 
increased risk of CHD"—surprising, because eggs are particu­
larly high in cholesterol. 44 *» IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
By the end of the review, there is one strong association be­
tween a type of dietary fat and heart disease left standing, and 
it happens to be precisely the type of fat that the low-fat cam­
paigners have spent most of the last thirty years encouraging us 
to consume more of: trans fats. It turns out that "a higher in­
take of trans fat can contribute to increased risk of CHD through 
multiple mechanisms"; to wit, it raises bad cholesterol and 
lowers good cholesterol (something not even the evil saturated 
fats can do); it increases triglycerides, a risk factor for CHD; 
it promotes inflammation and possibly thrombogenesis (clot­
ting) , and it may promote insulin resistance. Trans fat is really 
bad stuff, apparently, fully twice as bad as saturated fat in its 
impact on cholesterol ratios. If any of the authors of the critical 
review are conscious of the cosmic irony here—that the prin­
cipal contribution of thirty years of official nutritional advice 
has been to replace a possibly mildly unhealthy fat in our diets 
with a demonstrably lethal one—they are not saying. 
The paper is not quite prepared to throw out the entire 
lipid hypothesis, but by the end precious little of it is left 
standing. The authors conclude that while total levels of fat in 
the diet apparently have little bearing on the risk of heart dis­
ease (!), the ratio between types of fats does. Adding omega-3 
fatty acids to the diet (that is, eating more of a certain kind 
of fat) "substantially reduces coronary and total mortality" 
in heart patients, and replacing saturated fats with polyun­
saturated fats lowers blood cholesterol, which they deem an 
important risk factor for CHD. (Some researchers no longer 
do, pointing out that half the people who get heart attacks THE MELTING OF THE LIPID HYPOTHESIS <»> 45 
don't have elevated cholesterol levels, and about half the people 
with elevated cholesterol do not suffer from CHD.) One other 
little grenade is dropped in the paper's conclusion: Although "a 
major purported benefit of a low-fat diet is weight loss," a re­
view of the literature failed to turn up any convincing evidence 
of this proposition. To the contrary, it found "some evidence" 
that replacing fats in the diet with carbohydrates (as official 
dietary advice has urged us to do since the 1970s) will lead to 
weight gain. 
I have dwelled on this paper because it fairly reflects the 
current thinking on the increasingly tenuous links between 
dietary fat and health. The lipid hypothesis is quietly melting 
away, but no one in the public health community, or the gov­
ernment, seems quite ready to publicly acknowledge it. For fear 
of what exactly? That we'll binge on bacon double cheeseburg­
ers? More likely that we'll come to the unavoidable conclusion 
that the emperors of nutrition have no clothes and never listen 
to them again. 
In fact, there have been dissenters to the lipid hypothesis all 
along, lipid biochemists like Mary Enig (who has been sound­
ing the alarm on trans fats since the 1970s) and nutritionists 
like Fred Kummerow and John Yudkin (who have been sound­
ing the alarm on refined carbohydrates, also since the 1970s), 
but these critics have always had trouble getting a hearing, es­
pecially after 1977, when the McGovern guidelines effectively 
closed off debate on the lipid hypothesis. 
Scientific paradigms are never easy to challenge, even when 
they begin to crack under the weight of contradictory evidence. 46 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
Few scientists ever look back to see where they and their para­
digms might have gone astray; rather, they're trained to keep 
moving forward, doing yet more science to add to the incre­
ments of our knowledge, patching up and preserving whatever 
of the current consensus can be preserved until the next big 
idea comes along. So don't count on a scientific Aleksandr Sol-
zhenitsyn to show up and expose the whole fat paradigm as a 
historical disaster. 
The closest thing to such a figure we have had is not a sci­
entist but a science journalist named GaryTaubes, who for the 
last decade has been blowing the whistle on the science behind 
the low-fat campaign. In a devastating series of articles and 
an important new book called Good Calories, Bad Calories, Taubes 
has all but demolished the whole lipid hypothesis, demon­
strating just how little scientific backing it had from the very 
beginning. 
Indeed. Wind the tape back to 1976, and you find plenty of 
reasons to doubt the lipid hypothesis even then. Some of these 
reasons were circumstantial, but nevertheless compelling. For 
instance, during the decades of the twentieth century when 
rates of heart disease were rising in America, Americans were 
actually reducing their intake of animal fats (in the form of lard 
and tallow). In place of those fats, they consumed substantially 
more vegetable oils, especially in the form of margarine, sales 
of which outpaced butter for the first time in 1957. Between 
the end ofWorld War II and 1976 (the year of McGovern's hear­
ings) , per capita consumption of animal fats from all sources 
dropped from eighty-four pounds to seventy-one, while fats 
from seed oils approximately doubled. Americans appeared to THE MELTING OF THE LIPID HYPOTHESIS 0> 47 
be moving in the direction of a "prudent diet" and yet, para­
doxically, having more heart attacks on it, not fewer.* 
As for the precipitous decline in heart disease during the 
years of World War II, that could just as easily be attributed to 
factors other than the scarcity of meat, butter, and eggs. Not 
just animal protein, but sugar and gasoline were also strictly 
rationed during the war. Americans generally ate less of ev­
erything, including, notably, refined carbohydrates; they did, 
however, eat more fish. And got more exercise because they 
couldn't drive as freely thanks to gas rationing. 
But the lipid hypothesis would not be deterred. Research­
ers in the 1950s and 1960s had studied populations in other 
countries that had substantially lower rates of heart disease, 
which could be explained by their lower consumption of satu­
rated fat. That it could just as easily be explained by other fac­
tors—fewer total calories? fewer refined carbohydrates? more 
exercise? more fruits and vegetables or fish?—did not disturb 
the gathering consensus that fat must be the key. 
The consensus hinged on two suggestive links that were 
well established by the early sixties: a link between high rates 
of cholesterol in the blood and the likelihood of heart disease 
and a link between saturated fat in the diet and cholesterol lev­
els in the blood. Both these links have held up, but it doesn't 
necessarily follow from them that consumption of saturated 
*In 1945, 217,000 deaths in the United States were attributed to heart attacks. 
By 1960 there were 500,000. By 2001 that number had fallen to 185,000. 
(It's important to note that the diagnostic criteria for heart attack have changed 
over time, as has the size of the population.) 48 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
fat leads to heart disease, unless you can also demonstrate that 
serum cholesterol is a cause of heart disease and not, say, just 
a symptom of it. And though evidence for a link between cho­
lesterol in the diet and cholesterol in the blood has always been 
tenuous, the belief that the former contributed to the latter has 
persisted, perhaps because it makes such intuitive sense—and 
perhaps because it has been so heavily promoted by the mar­
garine makers. 
Despite these gaps, it seemed a short easy step for McGov-
ern's committee to link the links, as it were, and conclude that 
eating meat and dairy (as important sources of both saturated 
fat and cholesterol) contributed to heart disease. After all, the 
American Heart Association had already taken the same short 
link-linking step and had been advocating a prudent diet low 
in fat and cholesterol since 1961. Still, the committee was not 
unaware of the controversy surrounding the research on which 
it was basing its recommendations. It had received a strongly 
worded letter of dissent from the American Medical Associa­
tion, arguing that "there is a potential for harmful effects for 
a radical long-term dietary change as would occur through 
adoption of the proposed national goal." 
Still, the national goal was adopted. Never before had the 
government endeavored to change the diet of the whole popu­
lation. In the past nutritional policies had targeted particular 
populations at risk for particular deficiencies. But asTaubes has 
documented, the attitude on the committee was that even if 
all the data weren't hard as rock quite yet, what would be the 
harm in getting Americans to cut down on dietary fats? At the 
press conference introducing the Dietary Goals, Mark Hegsted, THE MELTING OF THE LIPID HYPOTHESIS <* 49 
the Harvard School of Public Health nutritionist who helped 
to shape them, put it this way: "The question to be asked is not 
why we should change our diet, but why not?" 
At least one good answer to that question was apparently 
overlooked. Perhaps because fat was in such bad repute in 
19 7 7, Dr. Hegsted and his colleagues must not have stopped to 
consider how a change in the levels or ratios of the various lip­
ids, and the promotion of a biologically novel fat like trans fat, 
might affect human physiology. It bears remembering that the 
human brain is about 60 percent fat; every neuron is sheathed 
in a protective layer of the stuff. Fats make up the structure of 
our cell walls, the ratios between the various kinds influencing 
the permeability of the cells to everything from glucose and 
hormones to microbes and toxins. Without adequate amounts 
of fat in the diet, fat-soluble vitamins like A and E can't pass 
through the intestinal walls. All this was known in 1977. But 
the Hippocratic oath—"First do no harm"—evidently does not 
apply to official dietary advice, which at least in 1977 followed 
a very different principle: "Why not?" 
So potentially much was at stake for our health and well-
being when the government threw its weight behind a whole­
sale change in the American diet. True, it was entirely possible 
that the nation would have chosen simply to ignore the Dietary 
Goals and go on eating as it had. But that's not what happened. 
Instead, the goals were taken seriously, and one of the more 
ambitious nutritional experiments in our history got under 
way. Authority over the national menu, which in the past had 
rested largely with tradition and habit (and mom), shifted per­
ceptibly in January 1977: Culture ceded a large measure of its SO «>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
influence over how we ate and thought about eating to sci­
ence. Or what passes for science in dietary matters; nutrition­
ism would be a more accurate term. "Premature or not," The 
New York Times' Jane Brody wrote in 1981, "the Dietary Goals are 
beginning to reshape the nutritional philosophy, if not yet the 
eating habits, of most Americans." 
six « EAT RIGHT, GET FATTER 
In fact, we did change our eating habits in the wake of the 
new guidelines, endeavoring to replace the evil fats at the top 
of the food pyramid with the good carbs spread out at the bot­
tom. The whole of the industrial food supply was reformulated 
to reflect the new nutritional wisdom, giving us low-fat pork, 
low-fat Snackwell's, and all the low-fat pasta and high-fructose 
(yet low-fat!) corn syrup we could consume. Which turned 
out to be quite a lot. Oddly, Americans got really fat on their 
new low-fat diet—indeed, many date the current epidemic of 
obesity and diabetes to the late 1970s, when Americans began 
bingeing on carbohydrates, ostensibly as a way to avoid the 
evils of fat. 
But the story is slightly more complicated than that. For 
while it is true that Americans post-1977 did shift the bal­
ance in their diets from fats to carbs so that fat as a percentage of 
total calories in the diet declined (from 42 percent in 1977 to EAT RIGHT, GET FATTER SI 
34 percent in 1995), we never did in fact cut down on our 
total consumption of fat; we just ate more of other things. 
We did reduce our consumption of saturated fats, replacing 
them, as directed, with polyunsaturated fats and trans fats. Meat 
consumption actually held steady, though we did, again as in­
structed, shift from red meat to white to reduce our saturated 
fat intake. Basically what we did was heap a bunch more carbs 
onto our plate, obscuring but by no means replacing the ex­
panding chunk of (now skinless white) animal protein still 
sitting there in the middle. 
How did that happen? I would submit that the ideology 
of nutritionism deserves as much of the blame as the carbo­
hydrates themselves do—that and human nature. By framing 
dietary advice in terms of good and bad nutrients, and by 
burying the recommendation that we should eat less of any 
particular actual food, it was easy for the take-home message 
of the 1977 and 1982 dietary guidelines to be simplified as 
follows: Eat more low-fat foods. And that is precisely what we did. 
We're always happy to receive a dispensation to eat more of 
something (with the possible exception of oat bran), and one 
of the things nutritionism reliably gives us is some such dis­
pensation: low-fat cookies then, low-carb beer now. It's hard 
to imagine the low-fat/high-carb craze taking off as it did or 
our collective health deteriorating to the extent that it has if 
McGovern's original food-based recommendation had stood: 
Eat less meat and fewer dairy products. For how do you get from that 
stark counsel to the idea that another carton of Snackwell's is 
just what the doctor ordered? 
You begin to see how attractive nutritionism is for all par-52 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
ties concerned, consumers as well as producers, not to mention 
the nutrition scientists and journalists it renders indispensable. 
The ideology offers a respectable rationale for creating and 
marketing all manner of new processed foods and permission 
for people to eat them. Plus, every course correction in nutri­
tionist advice gives reason to write new diet books and articles, 
manufacture a new line of products, and eat a whole bunch 
of even more healthy new food products. And if a product is 
healthy by design and official sanction, then eating Jots of it 
must be healthy too—maybe even more so. 
Nutritionism might be the best thing ever to happen to the 
food industry, which historically has labored under the limits 
to growth imposed by a population of eaters that isn't expand­
ing nearly as fast as the food makers need it to if they are to 
satisfy the expectations of Wall Street. Nutritionism solves the 
problem of the fixed stomach, as it used to be called in the 
business: the fact that compared to other consumer products, 
demand for food has in the past been fairly inelastic. People 
could eat only so much, and because tradition and habit ruled 
their choices, they tended to eat the same old things. Not any­
more! Not only does nutritionism favor ever more novel kinds 
of highly processed foods (which are by far the most profitable 
kind to make), it actually enlists the medical establishment and 
the government in the promotion of those products. Play your 
cards right and you can even get the American Heart Associa­
tion to endorse your new breakfast cereal as "heart healthy." 
As I write, the FDA has just signed off on a new health claim 
for Frito-Lay chips on the grounds that eating chips fried in BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE « 53 
polyunsaturated fats can help you reduce your consumption of 
saturated fats, thereby conferring blessings on your cardiovas­
cular system. So can a notorious junk food pass through the 
needle eye of nutritionist logic and come out the other side 
looking like a health food. 
SEVEN * BEYOND THE 
PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 
We eaters, alas, don't reap nearly as much benefit from 
nutritionism as food producers. Beyond providing a 
license to eat more of the latest approved foodlike substance, 
which we surely do appreciate, nutritionism tends to foster a 
great deal of anxiety around the experience of shopping for 
food and eating it. To do it right, you've got to be up on the 
latest scientific research, study ever-longer and more confusing 
ingredients labels,* sift through increasingly dubious health 
claims, and then attempt to enjoy foods that have been engi­
neered with many other objectives in view than simply tasting 
good. To think of some of the most delicious components of 
*Geoffrey Cannon points out that nutrition labels, which have become the 
single most ubiquitous medium of chemical information in our lives, "are 
advertisements for the chemical principle of nutrition." 54 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
food as toxins, as nutritionism has taught us to do in the case 
of fat, does little for our happiness as eaters. Americans have 
embraced a "nutritional philosophy," to borrow Jane Brody's 
words, that, regardless of whether that philosophy does any­
thing for our health, surely takes much of the pleasure out of 
eating. 
But why do we even need a nutritional philosophy in the 
first place? Perhaps because we Americans have always had a 
problem taking pleasure in eating. We certainly have gone to 
unusual lengths to avoid it. Harvey Levenstein, who has written 
two illuminating histories of American food culture, suggests 
that the sheer abundance of food in America has bred "a vague 
indifference to food, manifested in a tendency to eat and run, 
rather than to dine and savor." To savor food, to conceive of a 
meal as an aesthetic experience, has been regarded as evidence 
of effeteness, a form of foreign foppery. (Few things have been 
more likely to get an American political candidate in hot water 
than a taste for fine food, as Martin Van Buren discovered during 
his failed 1840 reelection campaign. Van Buren had brought a 
French chef to the White House, a blunder seized on by his op­
ponent, William Henry Harrison, who made much of the fact 
that he subsisted on "raw beef and salt." George H. W Bush's 
predilection for pork rinds and Bill Clinton's for Big Macs were 
politically astute tastes to show off.) 
It could well be that, as Levenstein contends, the sheer 
abundance of food in America has fostered a culture of care­
less, perfunctory eating. But our Puritan roots also impeded a 
sensual or aesthetic enjoyment of food. Like sex, the need to BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE «1 55 
eat links us to the animals, and historically a great deal of Prot­
estant energy has gone into helping us keep all such animal 
appetites under strict control. To the Christian social reform­
ers of the nineteenth century, "The naked act of eating was 
little more than unavoidable . . . and was not to be considered 
a pleasure except with great discretion." I'm quoting from 
Laura Shapiro's Perfection Salad, which recounts the campaign of 
these domestic reformers to convince Americans, in the words 
of one, "that eating is something more than animal indul­
gence, and that cooking has a nobler purpose than the grati­
fication of appetite and the sense of taste." And what might 
that nobler purpose be? Sound nutrition and good sanitation. 
By elevating those scientific principles and "disdaining the 
proof of the palate," Shapiro writes, "they made it possible 
for American cooking to accept a flood of damaging innova­
tions for years to come"—low-fat processed food products 
prominent among them. 
So scientific eating is an old and venerable tradition in 
America. Here's how Harvey Levenstein sums up the quasisci-
entific beliefs that have shaped American attitudes toward food 
for more than a century: "that taste is not a true guide to what 
should be eaten; that one should not simply eat what one en­
joys; that the important components of foods cannot be seen 
or tasted, but are discernible only in scientific laboratories; 
and that experimental science has produced rules of nutrition 
which will prevent illness and encourage longevity." Levenstein 
could be describing the main tenets of nutritionism. 
Perhaps the most notorious flowering of pseudoscientific 56 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
eating (and protonutritionism) came in the early years of the 
twentieth century, when John Harvey Kellogg and Horace 
Fletcher persuaded thousands of Americans to trade all plea­
sure in eating for health-promoting dietary regimens of truly 
breathtaking rigor and perversity. The two diet gurus were 
united in their contempt for animal protein, the consump­
tion of which Dr. Kellogg, a Seventh-Day Adventist who bore 
a striking resemblance to KFC's Colonel Sanders, firmly be­
lieved promoted both masturbation and the proliferation of 
toxic bacteria in the colon. During this, the first golden age 
of American food faddism, protein performed much the same 
role that fat would perform during the next. At Kellogg's Battle 
Creek sanitarium, patients (who included John D. Rockefeller 
and Theodore Roosevelt) paid a small fortune to be subjected 
to such "scientific" practices as hourly yogurt enemas (to undo 
the damage that protein supposedly wreaked on the colon); 
electrical stimulation and "massive vibration" of the abdomen; 
diets consisting of nothing but grapes (ten to fourteen pounds 
of them a day); and at every meal, "Fletcherizing," the prac­
tice of chewing each bite of food approximately one hundred 
times. (Often to the rousing accompaniment of special chew­
ing songs.) The theory was that thorough mastication would 
reduce protein intake (this seems certain) and thereby improve 
"subjective and objective well-being." Horace Fletcher (aka 
"the great masticator") had no scientific credentials whatso­
ever, but the example of his own extraordinary fitness—at fifty 
he could bound up and down the Washington Monument's 
898 steps without pausing to catch his breath—while existing 
on a daily regimen of only 45 well-chewed grams of protein BEYOND THE PLEASURE PRINCIPLE 57 
was all the proof his adherents needed.* The brothers Henry 
and William James both became enthusiastic "chewers.""1" 
Whatever their biological efficacy, all these dietary exer­
tions had the effect of removing eating from social life and 
pleasure from eating; compulsive chewing (much less hourly 
enema breaks) is not exactly conducive to the pleasures of the 
table. Also, Fletcherizing would have forcibly drained food of 
the very last glimmer of flavor long before the hundredth con­
traction of the jaw had been counted. Kellogg himself was out­
spoken in his hostility to the pleasures of eating: "The decline 
of a nation commences when gourmandizing begins." 
If that is so, America had little reason to worry. 
America s early attraction to various forms of scientific eat­
ing may also have reflected discomfort about the way other 
people eat: the weird, messy, smelly, and mixed-up eating habits 
of immigrants.* How a people eats is one of the most powerful 
* According to Levenstein, scientists seeking the secret of Fletcher's exemplary 
health scrupulously monitored his ingestions and excretions, "noting with 
regard to the latter, as all observers did, the remarkable absence of odor" 
(Levenstein, Revolution of the Table, p. 89). 
^William James wrote of Fletcher that "if his observations on diet, confirmed 
already on a limited scale, should prove true on a universal scale, it is 
impossible to overestimate their revolutionary import." Fletcher returned the 
favor, assuring the philosopher that Fletcherism was "advancing the same 
cause as Pragmatism" (Levenstein, Revolution of the Table, p. 92). 
* Americans were particularly disturbed by the way many immigrant groups 
mixed their foods in stews and such, in contrast to the Anglo-American 
practice of keeping foods separate on the plate, the culinary format 
anthropologist Mary Douglas calls " 1A plus 2B"—one chunk of animal 
protein plus two vegetables or starches. Perhaps the disdain for mixing foods 
reflected anxieties about other kinds of mixing. 58 *>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
EIGHT o THE PROOF IN THE 
LOW-FAT PUDDING 
Whatever the sacrifice of pleasure, it would be made up 
for by better health—that, at least, has always been 
nutritionism's promise. But it's difficult to conclude that sci­
entific eating has contributed to our health. As mentioned, the 
low-fat campaign coincided with a dramatic increase in the 
incidence of obesity and diabetes in America. You could blame 
this unfortunate fallout on us eaters for following the official 
advice to eat more low-fat food a little too avidly. This explana-ways they have to express, and preserve, their cultural identity, 
which is exactly what you don't want in a society dedicated to 
the ideal of "Americanization." To make food choices more 
scientific is to empty them of their ethnic content and history; 
in theory, at least, nutritionism proposes a neutral, modernist, 
forward-looking, and potentially unifying answer to the ques­
tion of what it might mean to eat like an American. It is also a 
way to moralize about other people's choices without seem­
ing to. In this, nutritionism is a little like the institution of the 
American front lawn, an unobjectionable, if bland, way to pave 
over our differences and Americanize the landscape. Of course 
in both cases unity comes at the price of aesthetic diversity and 
sensory pleasure. Which may be precisely the point. THE PROOF IN THE LOW-FAT PUDDING « 59 
tion suggests that the problem with the low-fat campaign has 
been in its execution rather than in the theory behind it, and 
that a better, clearer public health message might have saved us 
from ourselves. But it is also possible that the advice itself, to 
replace fats in the diet with carbohydrates, was misguided. As 
the Hu paper suggests, there is a growing body of evidence that 
shifting from fats to carbohydrates may lead to weight gain (as 
well as a host of other problems). This is counterintuitive, be­
cause fats contain nearly twice as many calories as carbs (9 per 
gram for fats as compared to 5 for either carbohydrates or pro­
tein) . The theory is that refined carbohydrates interfere with 
insulin metabolism in ways that increase hunger and promote 
overeating and fat storage in the body. (Call it the carbohy­
drate hypothesis; it's coming.)* If this is true, then there is no 
escaping the conclusion that the dietary advice enshrined not 
*Gary Taubes describes the developing carbohydrate hypothesis at great length 
in Good Calories, Bad Calories. According to the hypothesis, most of the 
damage to our health that has been wrongly attributed to fats for the past half 
century—heart disease, obesity, cancer, diabetes, and so on—can rightly be 
blamed on refined carbohydrates. But the healthy skepticism Taubes brought 
to the lipid hypothesis is nowhere in evidence when he writes about the (also 
unproven) carbohydrate hypothesis. Even if refined carbohydrates do represent 
a more serious threat to health than dietary fat, to dwell on any one nutrient 
to the exclusion of all others is to commit the same reductionist error that the 
lipophobes did. Indeed, Taubes is so single-minded in his demonization of 
the carbohydrate that he overlooks several other possible explanations for the 
deleterious effects of the Western diet, including deficiencies of omega-3s and 
micronutrients from plants. He also downplays the risks (to health as well 
as eating pleasure) of the high-protein Atkins diet that the carbohydrate 
hypothesis implies is a sound way to eat. As its title suggests, Good Calories, Bad 
Calories, valuable as it is, does not escape the confines of nutritionism. 60 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
only in the McGovern "Goals" but also in the National Acad­
emy of Sciences report, the dietary guidelines of the American 
Heart Association and the American Cancer Society and the U.S. 
food pyramid bears direct responsibility for creating the public 
health crisis that now confronts us. 
Even if we accept the epidemic of obesity and diabetes as 
the unintended consequence of the war against dietary fat-
collateral damage, you might say—what about the intended 
consequence of that campaign: the reduction of heart disease? 
Here is where the low-fat campaigners have chosen to make 
their last stand, pointing proudly to the fact that after peak­
ing in the late sixties, deaths from heart disease fell dramati­
cally in America, a 50 percent decline since 1969. Cholesterol 
levels have also fallen. Epidemiologist Walter C. Willett of the 
Harvard School of Public Health (a coauthor of the Hu paper) 
cites the increase in consumption of polyunsaturated fats "as 
a major factor, if not the most important factor, in the decline 
in heart disease" observed in the seventies and eighties and 
calls the campaign to replace saturated fats in the diet one of 
the great public health success stories of our time. And so it 
would appear to be: We reduced our saturated fat intake, our 
cholesterol levels fell, and many fewer people dropped dead of 
heart attacks. 
Whether the low-fat campaigners should take the credit 
for this achievement is doubtful, however. Reducing mortality 
from heart disease is not the same thing as reducing the inci­
dence of heart disease, and there's reason to question whether 
underlying rates of heart disease have greatly changed in the 
last thirty years, as they should have if changes in diet were so BAD SCIENCE <* 61 
important. A ten-year study of heart disease mortality published 
in the New England Journal of Medicine in 1998 strongly suggests that 
most of the decline in deaths from heart disease is due not to 
changes in lifestyle, such as diet, but to improvements in medi­
cal care. (Though cessation of smoking has been important.) 
For while during the period under analysis, heart attack deaths 
declined substantially, hospital admissions for heart attack did 
not. Modern medicine is clearly saving more people suffering 
from heart disease, but it appears that we haven't had nearly as 
much success eliminating the disease itself. 
'o understand how nutrition science could have been so 
_L spectacularly wrong about dietary fat and health, it's im­
portant to understand that doing nutrition science isn't easy. In 
fact, it's a lot harder than most of the scientists who do it for a 
living realize or at least are willing to admit. For one thing, the 
scientific tools at their disposal are in many ways ill suited to 
the task of understanding systems as complex as food and diet. 
The assumptions of nutritionism—such as the idea that a food 
is not a system but rather the sum of its nutrient parts—pose 
another set of problems. We like to think of scientists as being 
free from ideological taint, but of course they are as much 
the product of their ideological environment as the rest of us. NINE o> BAD SCIENCE 62 0> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
In the same way nutritionism can lead to a false conscious­
ness in the mind of the eater, it can just as easily mislead the 
scientist. 
The problem starts with the nutrient. Most nutritional sci­
ence involves studying one nutrient at a time, a seemingly un­
avoidable approach that even nutritionists who do it will tell 
you is deeply flawed. "The problem with nutrient-by-nutrient 
nutrition science," points out Marion Nestle, a New York Uni­
versity nutritionist, "is that it takes the nutrient out of the con­
text of the food, the food out of the context of the diet, and the 
diet out of the context of the lifestyle." 
If nutrition scientists know this, why do they do it any­
way? Because a nutrient bias is built into the way science is 
done. Scientists study variables they can isolate; if they can't 
isolate a variable, they won't be able to tell whether its pres­
ence or absence is meaningful. Yet even the simplest food is a 
hopelessly complicated thing to analyze, a virtual wilderness 
of chemical compounds, many of which exist in intricate and 
dynamic relation to one another, and all of which together 
are in the process of changing from one state to another. So if 
you're a nutrition scientist you do the only thing you can do, 
given the tools at your disposal: Break the thing down into 
its component parts and study those one by one, even if that 
means ignoring subtle interactions and contexts and the fact 
that the whole may well be more than, or maybe just different 
from, the sum of its parts. This is what we mean by reduction­
ist science. 
Scientific reductionism is an undeniably powerful tool, but 
it can mislead us too, especially when applied to something as BAD SCIENCE 0> 63 
complex, on the one side, as a food and on the other a human 
eater. It encourages us to take a simple mechanistic view of 
that transaction: Put in this nutrient, get out that physiological 
result. Yet people differ in important ways. We all know that 
lucky soul who can eat prodigious quantities of fattening food 
without ever gaining weight. Some populations can metabolize 
sugars better than others. Depending on your evolutionary her­
itage, you may or may not be able to digest the lactose in milk. 
Depending on your genetic makeup, reducing the saturated fat 
in your diet may or may not move your cholesterol numbers. 
The specific ecology of your intestines helps determine how 
efficiently you digest what you eat, so that the same 100 calo­
ries of food may yield more or less food energy depending on 
the proportion of Firmicutes and Bacteroides resident in your 
gut. In turn, that balance of bacterial species could owe to your 
genes or to something in your environment. So there is noth­
ing very machinelike about the human eater, and to think of 
food as simply fuel is to completely misconstrue it. It's worth 
keeping in mind too that, curiously, the human digestive tract 
has roughly as many neurons as the spinal column. We don't 
yet know exactly what they're up to, but their existence sug­
gests that much more is going on in digestion than simply the 
breakdown of foods into chemicals. 
Also, people don't eat nutrients; they eat foods, and foods 
can behave very differently from the nutrients they contain. 
Based on epidemiological comparisons of different popula­
tions, researchers have long believed that a diet containing lots 
of fruits and vegetables confers some protection against cancer. 
So naturally they ask, What nutrient in those plant foods is 64 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
responsible for that effect? One hypothesis is that the antioxi­
dants in fresh produce—compounds like beta-carotene, lyco-
pene, vitamin E, and so on—are the X factor. It makes good 
theoretical sense: These molecules (which plants produce to 
protect themselves from the highly reactive forms of oxygen 
they produce during photosynthesis) soak up the free radicals 
in our bodies, which can damage DNA and initiate cancers. At 
least that's how it seems to work in a test tube. Yet as soon as 
you remove these crucial molecules from the context of the 
whole foods they're found in, as we've done in creating anti­
oxidant supplements, they don't seem to work at all. Indeed, in 
the case of beta-carotene ingested as a supplement, one study 
has suggested that in some people it may actually increase the 
risk of certain cancers. Big oops. 
What's going on here? We don't know. It could be the va­
garies of human digestion. Maybe the fiber (or some other 
component) in a carrot protects the antioxidant molecule from 
destruction by stomach acids early in the digestive process. Or 
it could be we isolated the wrong antioxidant. Beta is just one 
of a whole slew of carotenes found in common vegetables; 
maybe we focused on the wrong one. Or maybe beta-carotene 
works as an antioxidant only in concert with some other plant 
chemical or process; under other circumstances it may behave 
as a pro-oxidant. 
Indeed, to look at the chemical composition of any com­
mon food plant is to realize just how much complexity lurks 
within it. Here's a list of just the antioxidants that have been 
identified in a leaf of garden-variety thyme: BAD SCIENCE Oi 65 
alanine, anethole essential oil, apigenin, ascorbic 
acid, beta-carotene, caffeic acid, camphene, 
carvacrol, chlorogenic acid, chrysoeriol, derulic 
acid, eriodictyol, eugenol, 4-terpinol, gallic acid, 
gamma-terpinene, isichlorogenic acid, isoeugenol, 
isothymonin, kaemferol, labiatic acid, lanric acid, 
linalyl acetate, luteolin, methionine, myrcene, 
myristic acid, naringenin, rosmarinic acid, 
selenium, tannin, thymol, trytophan, ursolic acid, 
vanillic acid. 
This is what you ingest when you eat food flavored with 
thyme. Some of these chemicals are broken down by your di­
gestion, but others go on to do various as-yet-undetermined 
things to your body: turning some gene's expression on or 
off, perhaps, or intercepting a free radical before it disturbs a 
strand of DNA deep in some cell. It would be great to know 
how this all works, but in the meantime we can enjoy thyme 
in the knowledge that it probably doesn't do any harm (since 
people have been eating it forever) and that it might actually 
do some good (since people have been eating it forever), and 
even if it does nothing at all, we like the way it tastes. 
It's important also to remind ourselves that what reduc­
tive science can manage to perceive well enough to isolate and 
study is subject to almost continual change, and that we have 
a tendency to assume that what we can see is the important 
thing to look at. The vast attention paid to cholesterol since 
the 1950s is largely the result of the fact that for a long time 66 *» IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
cholesterol was the only factor linked to heart disease that we 
had the tools to measure. (This is sometimes called parking-lot 
science, after the legendary fellow who loses his keys in a park­
ing lot and goes looking for them under the streetlight—not 
because that's where he lost them but because that's where 
it's easiest to see.) When we learned how to measure different 
types of cholesterol, and then triglycerides and C-reactive pro­
tein, those became the important components to study. There 
will no doubt be other factors as yet unidentified. It's an old 
story: When Prout and Liebig nailed down the macronutri-
ents, scientists figured that they now understood the nature 
of food and what the body needed from it. Then when the 
vitamins were isolated a few decades later, scientists thought, 
okay, now we really understand food and what the body needs 
for its health; and today it's the polyphenols and carotenoids 
that seem to have completed the picture. But who knows what 
else is going on deep in the soul of a carrot? 
The good news is that, to the carrot eater, it doesn't mat­
ter. That's the great thing about eating foods as compared with 
nutrients: You don't need to fathom a carrot's complexity in 
order to reap its benefits. 
The mystery of the antioxidants points up the danger in 
taking a nutrient out of the context of food; scientists make a 
second, related error when they attempt to study the food out 
of the context of the diet. We eat foods in combinations and 
in orders that can affect how they're metabolized. The carbo­
hydrates in a bagel will be absorbed more slowly if the bagel 
is spread with peanut butter; the fiber, fat, and protein in the 
peanut butter cushion the insulin response, thereby blunting BAD SCIENCE «> 67 
the impact of the carbohydrates. (This is why eating dessert 
at the end of the meal rather than the beginning is probably a 
good idea.) Drink coffee with your steak, and your body won't 
be able to fully absorb the iron in the meat. The olive oil with 
which I eat tomatoes makes the lycopene they contain more 
available to my body. Some of those compounds in the sprig of 
thyme may affect my digestion of the dish I add it to, helping 
to break down one compound or stimulate production of an 
enzyme needed to detoxify another. We have barely begun to 
understand the relationships among foods in a cuisine. 
But we do understand some of the simplest relationships 
among foods, like the zero-sum relationship: If you eat a lot of 
one thing, you're probably not eating a lot of something else. 
This fact alone may have helped lead the diet-heart research­
ers astray. Like most of us, they assumed that a bad outcome 
like heart disease must have a bad cause, like saturated fat or 
cholesterol, so they focused their investigative energies on how 
these bad nutrients might cause disease rather than on how 
the absence of something else, like plant foods or fish, might 
figure in the etiology of the disease. Nutrition science has usu­
ally put more of its energies into the idea that the problems 
it studies are the result of too much of a bad thing instead of 
too little of a good thing. Is this good science or nutritionist 
prejudice? The epidemiologist John Powles has suggested this 
predilection is little more than a Puritan bias: Bad things happen to 
people who eat bad things. 
But what people don't eat may matter as much as what 
they do. This fact could explain why populations that eat diets 
containing lots of animal food generally have higher rates of 68 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
coronary heart disease and cancer than those that don't. But 
nutritionism encouraged researchers to look beyond the possi­
bly culpable food itself—meat—to the culpable nutrient in the 
meat, which scientists have long assumed to be the saturated 
fat. So they are baffled indeed when large dietary trials like the 
Women's Health Initiative and the Nurses' Health Study fail to 
find evidence that reducing fat intake significantly reduces the 
incidence of heart disease or cancer. 
Of course thanks to the low-fat-diet fad (inspired by the 
same reductionist hypothesis about fat), it is entirely possible 
to slash your intake of saturated fat without greatly reducing 
your consumption of animal protein: Just drink the low-fat 
milk, buy the low-fat cheese, and order the chicken breast or 
the turkey bacon instead of the burger. So did the big dietary 
trials exonerate meat or just fat? Unfortunately, the focus on 
nutrients didn't tell us much about foods. Perhaps the culprit 
nutrient in meat and dairy is the animal protein itself, as some 
researchers hypothesize. (The Cornell nutritionist T. Colin 
Campbell argues as much in his recent book, The China Study) 
Others think it could be the particular kind of iron in red meat 
(called heme iron) or the nitrosamines produced when meat 
is cooked. Perhaps it is the steroid growth hormones typically 
present in the milk and meat; these hormones (which occur 
naturally in meat and milk but are often augmented in in­
dustrial production) are known to promote certain kinds of 
cancer. 
Or, as I mentioned, the problem with a meat-heavy diet 
might not even be the meat itself but the plants that all that 
meat has pushed off the plate. We just don't know. But eaters BAD SCIENCE 69 
worried about their health needn't wait for science to setde 
this question before deciding that it might be wise to eat more 
plants and less meat. This of course is precisely what the Mc-
Govern committee was trying to tell us. 
The zero-sum fallacy of nutrition science poses another ob­
stacle to nailing down the effect of a single nutrient. As Gary 
Taubes points out, it's difficult to design a dietary trial of some­
thing like saturated fat because as soon as you remove it from 
the trial diet, either you have dramatically reduced the calories 
in that diet or you have replaced the saturated fat with some­
thing else: other fats (but which ones?), or carbohydrates (but 
what kind?), or protein. Whatever you do, you've introduced a 
second variable into the experiment, so you will not be able to 
attribute any observed effect strictly to the absence of saturated 
fat. It could just as easily be due to the reduction in calories 
or the addition of carbohydrates or polyunsaturated fats. For 
every diet hypothesis you test, you can construct an alternative 
hypothesis based on the presence or absence of the substitute 
nutrient. It gets messy. 
And then there is the placebo effect, which has always 
bedeviled nutrition research. About a third of Americans are 
what researchers call responders—people who will respond to 
a treatment or intervention regardless of whether they've actu­
ally received it. When testing a drug you can correct for this by 
using a placebo in your trial, but how do you correct for the 
placebo effect in the case of a dietary trial? You can't: Low-fat 
foods seldom taste like the real thing, and no person is ever 
going to confuse a meat entrée for a vegetarian substitute. 
Marion Nestle also cautions against taking the diet out of 70 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
the context of the lifestyle, a particular hazard when compar­
ing the diets of different populations. The Mediterranean diet 
is widely believed to be one of the most healthful traditional 
diets, yet much of what we know about it is based on studies of 
people living in the 1950s on the island of Crete—people who 
in many respects led lives very different from our own. Yes, they 
ate lots of olive oil and more fish than meat. But they also did 
more physical labor. As followers of the Greek Orthodox church, 
they fasted frequendy.They ate lots of wild greens—weeds. And, 
perhaps most significant, they ate far fewer total calories than 
we do. Similarly, much of what we know about the health ben­
efits of a vegetarian diet is based on studies of Seventh-Day 
Adventists, who muddy the nutritional picture by abstaining 
from alcohol and tobacco as well as meat. These extraneous but 
unavoidable factors are called, apdy, confounders. 
One last example: People who take supplements are health­
ier than the population at large, yet their health probably has 
nothing whatsoever to do with the supplements they take— 
most of which recent studies have suggested are worthless. 
Supplement takers tend to be better educated, more affluent 
people who, almost by définition, take a greater than usual in­
terest in personal health—confounders that probably account 
for their superior health. 
But if confounding factors of lifestyle bedevil epidemio­
logical comparisons of different populations, the supposedly 
more rigorous studies of large American populations suffer 
from their own arguably even more disabling flaws. In ascend­
ing order of supposed reliability, nutrition researchers have 
three main methods for studying the impact of diet on health: BAD SCIENCE <©> 71 
the case-control study, the cohort study, and the intervention 
trial. All three are seriously flawed in different ways. 
In the case-control study, researchers attempt to determine 
the diet of a subject who has been diagnosed with a chronic 
disease in order to uncover its cause. One problem is that when 
people get sick they may change the way they eat, so the diet 
they report may not be the diet responsible for their illness. An­
other problem is that these patients will typically report eating 
large amounts of whatever the evil nutrient of the moment is. 
These people read the newspaper too; it's only natural to search 
for the causes of one's misfortune and, perhaps, to link one's 
illness to one's behavior. One of the more pernicious aspects of 
nutritionism is that it encourages us to blame our health prob­
lems on lifestyle choices, implying that the individual bears 
ultimate responsibility for whatever illnesses befall him. It's 
worth keeping in mind that a far more powerful predictor of 
heart disease than either diet or exercise is social class. 
Long-term observational studies of cohort groups such as 
the Nurses' Health Study represent a big step up in reliability 
from the case-control study. For one thing, the studies are pro­
spective rather than retrospective: They begin tracking subjects 
before they become ill. The Nurses' Study, which has collected 
data on the eating habits and health outcomes of more than 
one hundred thousand women over several decades (at a cost 
of more than one hundred million dollars), is considered the 
best study of its kind, yet it too has limitations. One is its reli­
ance on food-frequency questionnaires (about which more in 
a moment). Another is the population of nurses it has chosen 
to study. Critics (notably Colin Campbell) point out that the 72 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
sample is relatively uniform and is even more carnivorous than 
the U.S. population as a whole. Pretty much everyone in the 
group eats a Western diet. This means that when researchers 
divide the subject population into groups (typically fifths) to 
study the impact of, say, a low-fat diet, the quintile eating the 
lowest-fat diet is not all that low—or so dramatically different 
from the quintile consuming the highest-fat diet. "Virtually 
this entire cohort of nurses is consuming a high-risk diet," 
according to Campbell. That might explain why the Nurses' 
Study has failed to detect significant benefits for many of the 
dietary interventions it's looked at. In a subject population that 
is eating a fairly standard Western diet, as this one is, you're 
never going to capture the effects, good or bad, of more radi­
cally different ways of eating. (In his book, Campbell reports 
Walter Willett's personal response to this criticism: "You may 
be right, Colin, but people don't want to go there.") 
The so-called gold standard in nutrition research is the 
large-scale intervention study. In these studies, of which the 
Women's Health Initiative is the biggest and best known, a 
large population is divided into two groups. The interven­
tion group changes its diet in some prescribed way while 
the control group (one hopes) does not. The two groups are 
then tracked over many years to learn whether the interven­
tion affects relative rates of chronic disease. In the case of the 
Women's Health Initiative study of dietary fat, a $415 million 
undertaking sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, the 
eating habits and health outcomes of nearly forty-nine thou­
sand women (aged fifty to seventy-nine) were tracked for eight 
years to assess the impact of a low-fat diet on a woman's risk BAD SCIENCE « 73 
of breast and colorectal cancer and cardiovascular disease. Forty 
percent of the women were told to reduce their consumption 
of fat to 20 percent of total calories. When the results were an­
nounced in 2006, it made front-page news (The New York Times 
headline said LOW-FAT DIET DOES NOT CUT HEALTH RISKS, STUDY FINDS) 
and the cloud of nutritional confusion beneath which Ameri­
cans endeavor to eat darkened further. 
Even a cursory examination of the study's methods makes 
you wonder what, if anything, it proved, either about di­
etary fat or meat eating. You could argue that, like the Nurses' 
Healthy Study, all any such trials prove is that changing one 
component in the diet at a time, and not by much, does not 
confer a significant health benefit. But perhaps the strongest 
conclusion that can be drawn from an analysis of the Women's 
Health Initiative is about the inherent limitations of this kind 
of nutrient-by-nutrient nutrition research. 
Even the beginning student of nutritionism will immedi­
ately spot several flaws: The focus was on dietary fat rather 
than on any particular food, such as meat or dairy. So women 
could reach their goal simply by switching to lower-fat animal 
products. Also, no distinctions were made between different 
types of fat: Women getting their allowable portion of fat from 
olive oil or fish were lumped together with women getting 
their fat from low-fat cheese or chicken breasts or margarine. 
Why? Because when the study was designed sixteen years ago, 
the whole notion of "good fats" was not yet on the mainstream 
scientific scope. Scientists study what scientists can see. 
Another problem with the trial was that the low-fat group 
failed to hit the target of reducing their fat intake to 20 percent 74 *» IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
of total calories. The best they could manage was 24 percent in 
the first year, but by the end of the study they'd drifted back to 
29 percent, only a few percentage points lower than the control 
group's fat intake. Which was itself drifting downward as the 
women allowed to eat as much fat as they wanted presumably 
read the newspapers and the food product labels and absorbed 
the culture's enthusiasm for all things low fat. (This corruption 
of a control group by popular dietary advice is called the treat­
ment effect.) So it's hardly surprising that the health outcomes 
of the two groups would not greatly differ—by the end, they 
might have been consuming pretty much the same diet. 
I say "might have been" because we actually have little idea 
what these women were really eating. Like most people asked 
about their diet, they lied about it—which brings us to what is 
perhaps the single biggest problem in doing nutrition science. 
Even the scientists who conduct this sort of research conduct 
it in the knowledge that people underestimate (let's be gener­
ous) their food intake all the time. They have even developed 
scientific figures for the magnitude of the error. "Validation 
studies" of dietary trials like the Women's Health Initiative or 
the Nurses' Study, which rely on "food-frequency question­
naires" filled out by subjects several times a year, indicate that 
people on average eat between a fifth and a third more than 
they say they do on questionnaires.* How do the researchers 
*In fact, the magnitude of the error could be much greater, judging by the 
huge disparity between the total number of food calories produced every 
day for each American (3,900) and the average number of those calories 
Americans own up to chomping each day: 2,000. Waste can account for some 
of this disparity, but not nearly all of it. BAD SCIENCE « 75 
know that? By comparing what people report on their food-
frequency questionnaires with interviews about their dietary 
intake over the previous twenty-four hours, thought to be 
somewhat more reliable. Somewhat. Because as you might ex­
pect, these "twenty-four-hour recall" data have their own ac­
curacy problems: How typical of your overall diet is what you 
ate during any single twenty-four-hour period? 
To try to fill out the food-frequency questionnaire used by 
the Women's Health Initiative, as I recently did, is to realize 
just how shaky the data on which all such dietary studies rely 
really are. The survey, which takes about forty-five minutes to 
complete, starts off with some relatively easy questions. "Did 
you eat chicken or turkey during the last three months?" Hav­
ing answered yes, I then was asked, "When you ate chicken or 
turkey, how often did you eat the skin?" And, "Did you usually 
choose light meat, dark meat, both?" But the survey soon be­
came harder, as when it asked me to think back over the past 
three months to recall whether when I ate okra, squash, or yams 
were they fried, and if so, were they fried in stick margarine, 
tub margarine, butter, shortening (in which category they inex­
plicably lumped together hydrogenated vegetable oil and lard), 
olive or canola oil, or nonstick spray? I would hope they'd take 
my answers with a grain of salt because I honesdy didn't re­
member and in the case of any okra eaten in a restaurant, even 
a hypnotist or CIA interrogator could not extract from me what 
sort of fat it was fried in. Now that we spend half of our food 
dollars on meals prepared outside of the home, how can re­
spondents possibly know what type of fats they're consuming? 
Matters got even sketchier in the second section of the sur-76 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
vey, when I was asked to specify how many times in the last 
three months I'd eaten a half-cup serving of broccoli, among 
a dizzying array of other fruits and vegetables I was asked to 
tally for the dietary quarter. I'm not sure Marcel Proust himself 
could recall his dietary intake over the last ninety days with the 
sort of precision demanded by the FFQ. 
When you get to the meat section, the portion sizes speci­
fied haven't been seen in America since the Hoover administra­
tion. If a four-ounce portion of steak is considered "medium," 
was I really going to admit that the steak I enjoyed on an un-
recallable number of occasions during the past three months 
was probably the equivalent of two or three (or in the case of a 
steak house steak, no fewer than four) of these portions? I think 
not. In fact, most of the "medium serving sizes" to which I 
was asked to compare my own consumption made me feel like 
such a pig that I badly wanted to shave a few ounces here, a few 
there. (I mean, I wasn't under oath or anything.) 
These are is the sort of data on which the largest questions 
of diet and health are being decided today. "The most intellectu­
ally demanding challenge in the field of nutrition," as Marion 
Nesde writes in Food Politics, "is to determine dietary intake." The 
uncomfortable fact is that the entire field of nutritional science 
rests on a foundation of ignorance and lies about the most basic 
question of nutrition: What are people eating? Over lunch, I 
asked Nestle if I was perhaps being too harsh. She smiled. 
"To really know what a person is eating you'd have to have 
a second invisible person following them around, taking pho­
tographs, looking at ingredients, and consulting accurate food 
composition tables, which we don't have." When you report BAD SCIENCE 77 
on an FFQ that you ate a carrot, the tabulator consults a U.S. 
Department of Agriculture database to determine exactly how-
much calcium or beta-carotene that carrot contained. But be­
cause all carrots are not created equal, their nutrient content 
varying with everything from the variety planted and type of 
soil it was planted in to the agriculture system used (organic? 
conventional?) and the carrot's freshness, these tables suffer 
from their own inaccuracies. 
I was beginning to realize just how much suspension of 
disbelief it takes to be a nutrition scientist. 
"It's impossible," Nestle continued. "Are people uncon­
sciously underestimating consumption of things they think 
the researcher thinks are bad or overestimating consumption 
of things they think the researcher thinks are good? We don't 
know. Probably both. The issue of reporting is extraordinarily 
serious. We have to ask, How accurate are the data?" 
It's not as though the epidemiologists who develop and 
deploy FFQs are unaware of their limitations. Some of them, 
like Walter Willett, strive heroically to repair the faulty data, 
developing "energy adjustment" factors to correct for the fact 
that the calories reported on surveys are invariably wrong and 
complicated "measurement error" algorithms to fix the errors 
in the twenty-four-hour recall surveys used to fix the errors in 
the FFQ. 
I tracked down Gladys Block, the prominent epidemiologist 
who developed the FFQ on which the Women's Health Initiative 
based its own questionnaire. We met for coffee in Berkeley, where 
she is a professor in the School of Public Health. Nearing retire­
ment, Block is unusually thoughtful about the limits of her field 78 «>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
and disarmingly candid. "Its a mess," she said, speaking not of 
the FFQ itself but of the various formulae and algorithms being 
used to correct errors in the data. "Because if the energy [i.e., the 
reported calorie consumption] is off, then the nutrients are off 
too. So if you're going to correct for calories, do you then also 
correct for ..." She paused and then sighed. "No, it's a mess." 
Block thinks the problem with nutrition science, which 
she feels "has led us astray," is not the FFQ itself but mis- and 
overinterpretation of the data derived from the FFQ, a tool for 
which she makes realistic but strikingly modest claims: "The 
real purpose of the FFQ is to rank people" on their relative 
consumption of, say, fruits and vegetables or total calories. "If 
someone reports consuming five hundred calories a day, that's 
not true, obviously, but you can say they're probably at the low 
end of the spectrum. People overworry about accuracy." 
This was not the sort of thing I expected to hear from an 
epidemiologist. But then neither was this: "I don't believe any­
thing I read in nutritional epidemiology anymore. I'm so skep­
tical at this point." 
TEN « NUTRITIONISM'S 
CHILDREN 
So where does this leave us eaters? More confused about 
how to eat than any people in history, would be my strictly 
unscientific conclusion. Actually, there is some science, admit-NUTRITIONISM'S CHILDREN « 79 
tedly a little soft, which has captured a bit of the confusion 
that the supposedly harder science of nutrition has sown in 
the American mind. Paul Rozin is a psychologist at the Univer­
sity of Pennsylvania who has dreamed up some of the more 
imaginative survey questions ever asked of American eaters; 
the answers he's collected offer a pretty good index to our 
current befuddlement and anxiety about eating. He has found, 
for example, that half of us believe high-calorie foods eaten 
in small amounts contain more calories than low-calorie foods 
eaten in much larger amounts. And that a third of us believe 
that a diet absolutely free of fat—a nutrient, lest you forget, 
essential to our survival—would be better for us than a diet 
containing even just "a pinch" of it. In one experiment, he 
showed the words "chocolate cake" to a group of Americans 
and recorded their word associations. "Guilt" was the top re­
sponse. If that strikes you as unexceptional, consider the re­
sponse of the French eaters to the same prompt: "celebration." 
(Oh, yeah.) I think of Rozin as a kind of psychoanalyst of 
nutritionism. 
A few years ago, Rozin presented a group of Americans 
with the following scenario: "Assume you are alone on a desert 
island for one year and you can have water and one other food. 
Pick the food that you think would be best for your health." 
The choices were corn, alfalfa sprouts, hot dogs, spinach, 
peaches, bananas, and milk chocolate.The most popular choice 
was bananas (42 percent), followed by spinach (27 percent), 
corn (12 percent), alfalfa sprouts (7 percent), peaches (5 per­
cent), hot dogs (4 percent), and milk chocolate (3 percent). 
Only 7 percent of the participants chose one of the two foods 80 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
that would in fact best support survival: hot dogs and milk 
chocolate. 
Evidently some of the wreckage of the lipid hypothesis has 
washed up on Rozin s desert island. 
"Fat," he writes, "seems to have assumed, even at low lev­
els, the role of a toxin" in our dietary imaginations. I won­
der why. As Rozin points out, "Worrying so much about food 
can't be very good for your health." Indeed. Orthorexia ner­
vosa is an eating disorder not yet recognized by the DSM-IV, 
but some psychologists have recently suggested that it's time 
it was. They're seeing more and more patients suffering from 
"an unhealthy obsession with healthy eating." 
So this is what putting science, and scientism, in charge of 
the American diet has gotten us: anxiety and confusion about 
even the most basic questions of food and health, and a steadily 
diminishing ability to enjoy one of the great pleasures of life 
without guilt or neurosis. 
But while nutritionism has its roots in a scientific approach 
to food, it's important to remember that it is not a science 
but an ideology, and that the food industry, journalism, and 
government bear just as much responsibility for its conquest 
of our minds and diets. All three helped to amplify the sig­
nal of nutritionism: journalism by uncritically reporting the 
latest dietary studies on its front pages; the food industry by 
marketing dubious foodlike products on the basis of tenuous 
health claims; and the government by taking it upon itself to 
issue official dietary advice based on sketchy science in the first 
place and corrupted by political pressure in the second. The 
novel food products the industry designed according to the NUTRITIONISM'S CHILDREN <»> 81 
latest nutritionist specs certainly helped push real food off our 
plates. But the industry's influence would not be nearly so great 
had the ideology of nutritionism not already undermined the 
influence of tradition and habit and common sense—and the 
transmitter of all those values, mom—on our eating. 
Now, all this might be tolerable if eating by the light of nu­
tritionism made us, if not happier, then at least healthier. That 
it has failed to do. Thirty years of nutritional advice have left 
us fatter, sicker, and more poorly nourished. Which is why we 
find ourselves in the predicament we do: in need of a whole 
new way to think about eating. II 
THE WESTERN DIET 
AND THE DISEASES 
OF CIVILIZATION ONE « THE ABORIGINE 
IN ALL OF US 
In the summer of 1982, a group of ten middle-aged, over­
weight, and diabetic Aborigines living in settlements near 
the town of Derby, Western Australia, agreed to participate in 
an experiment to see if temporarily reversing the process of 
westernization they had undergone might also reverse their 
health problems. Since leaving the bush some years before, all 
ten had developed type 2 diabetes; they also showed signs of 
insulin resistance (when the body's cells lose their sensitivity to 
insulin) and elevated levels of triglycerides in the blood—a risk 
factor for heart disease. "Metabolic syndrome," or "syndrome 
X," is the medical term for the complex of health problems 
these Aborigines had developed: Large amounts of refined car­
bohydrates in the diet combined with a sedentary lifestyle had 
disordered the intricate (and still imperfectly understood) sys­
tem by which the insulin hormone regulates the metabolism 
of carbohydrates and fats in the body. Metabolic syndrome has 
been implicated not only in the development of type 2 diabe­
tes, but also in obesity, hypertension, heart disease, and pos-86 *>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
sibly certain cancers. Some researchers believe that metabolic 
syndrome may be at the root of many of the "diseases of civi­
lization" that typically follow a native population's adoption 
of a Western lifestyle and the nutrition transition that typically 
entails. 
The ten Aborigines returned to their traditional home­
land, an isolated region of northwest Australia more than a 
day's drive by off-road vehicle from the nearest town. From 
the moment they left civilization, the men and women in the 
group had no access to store food or beverages; the idea was 
for them to rely exclusively on foods they hunted and gathered 
themselves. (Even while living in town, they still occasionally 
hunted traditional foods and so had preserved the knowledge 
of how to do so.) Kerin O'Dea, the nutrition researcher who 
designed the experiment, accompanied the group to monitor 
and record its dietary intake and keep tabs on the members' 
health. 
The Aborigines divided their seven-week stay in the bush 
between a coastal and an inland location. While on the coast, 
their diet consisted mainly of seafood, supplemented by birds, 
kangaroo, and witchetty grubs, the fatty larvae of a local insect. 
Hoping to find more plant foods, the group moved inland after 
two weeks, settling at a riverside location. Here, in addition 
to freshwater fish and shellfish, the diet expanded to include 
turtle, crocodile, birds, kangaroo, yams, figs, and bush honey. 
The contrast between this hunter-gatherer fare and their previ­
ous diet was stark: O'Dea reports that prior to the experiment 
"the main dietary components in the urban setting were flour, 
sugar, rice, carbonated drinks, alcoholic beverages (beer and THE ABORIGINE IN ALL OF US «>> 87 
port), powdered milk, cheap fatty meat, potatoes, onions, and 
variable contributions of other fresh fruits and vegetables"— 
the local version of the Western diet. 
After seven weeks in the bush, O'Dea drew blood from 
the Aborigines and found striking improvements in virtually 
every measure of their health. All had lost weight (an average of 
17.9 pounds) and seen their blood pressure drop.Their triglyc­
eride levels had fallen into the normal range. The proportion 
of omega-3 fatty acids in their tissues had increased dramati­
cally. "In summary," O'Dea concluded, "all of the metabolic 
abnormalities of type II diabetes were either greatly improved 
(glucose tolerance, insulin response to glucose) or completely 
normalized (plasma lipids) in a group of diabetic Aborigi­
nes by a relatively short (seven week) reversion to traditional 
hunter-gatherer lifestyle." 
O'Dea does not report what happened next, whether the 
Aborigines elected to remain in the bush or return to civili­
zation, but it's safe to assume that if they did return to their 
Western lifestyles, their health problems returned too. We have 
known for a century now that there is a complex of so-called 
Western diseases—including obesity, diabetes, cardiovascu­
lar disease, hypertension, and a specific set of diet-related 
cancers—that begin almost invariably to appear soon after a 
people abandons its traditional diet and way of life. What we 
did not know before O'Dea took her Aborigines back to the 
bush (and since she did, a series of comparable experiments 
have produced similar results in Native Americans and native 
Hawaiians) was that some of the most deleterious effects of 
the Western diet could be so quickly reversed. It appears that, 88 «i IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
at least to an extent, we can rewind the tape of the nutrition 
transition and undo some of its damage. The implications for 
our own health are potentially significant.* 
The genius of Kerin O'Dea s experiment was its simplic­
ity—and her refusal to let herself be drawn into the scientific 
labyrinth of nutritionism. She did not attempt to pick out from 
the complexity of the diet (either before or after the experi­
ment) which one nutrient might explain the results—whether 
it was the low-fat diet, or the absence of refined carbohydrates, 
or the reduction in total calories that was responsible for the 
improvement in the group's health. Her focus instead was on 
larger dietary patterns, and while this approach has its limita­
tions (we can't extract from such a study precisely which com­
ponent of the Western diet we need to adjust in order to blunt 
its worst effects), it has the great virtue of escaping the welter 
•According to Walter C. Willett, only 3.1 percent of the Nurses' Health Study 
population could be described as following a "low risk" diet and lifestyle, which 
he defines as follows: nonsmoker, body-mass index (BMI) below 25 (the 
threshold for overweight), thirty minutes of exercise a day, and a diet 
characterized by low intake of trans fat; high ratio of polyunsaturated to 
saturated fats; high whole-grain intake; two servings of fish a week; 
recommended daily allowance of folic acid and at least five grams of alcohol a 
day. Based on fourteen years of follow-up, Willett and his colleagues calculated 
that, had the entire cohort adopted these behaviors, 80 percent of coronary heart 
disease; 90 percent of type 2 diabetes, and more than 70 percent of colon cancer 
cases could have been avoided. This analysis suggests that the worst effects of the 
Western diet can be avoided or reversed without leaving civilization. Or, as 
Willett writes, "the potential for disease prevention by modest dietary and 
lifestyle changes that are readily compatible with life in the 21st century is 
enormous." From Walter C. Willet, "The Pursuit of Optimal Diets: A Progress 
Report" in Jim Kaput, and Raymond L. Rodriguez, Nutritional Genomics: Discovering the 
Path to Personalized Nutrition (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2006). THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM 0> 89 
of conflicting theories about specific nutrients and returning 
our attention to more fundamental questions about the links 
between diet and health. 
Like this one: To what extent are we all Aborigines? When 
you consider that two thirds of Americans are overweight or 
obese, that fully a quarter of us have metabolic syndrome, that 
fifty-four million have prediabetes, and that the incidence of 
type 2 diabetes has risen 5 percent annually since 1990, going 
from 4 percent to 7.7 percent of the adult population (that's 
more than twenty million Americans), the question is not 
nearly as silly as it sounds. 
TWO * THE ELEPHANT IN 
THE ROOM 
In the end, even the biggest, most ambitious, and widely re­
ported studies of diet and health—the Nurses' Health Study, 
the Women's Health Initiative, and nearly all the others—leave 
undisturbed the main features of the Western diet: lots of 
processed foods and meat, lots of added fat and sugar, lots of 
everything except fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. In keep­
ing with the nutritionism paradigm and the limits of reduc­
tionist science, most nutrition researchers fiddle with single 
nutrients as best they can, but the populations they recruit 
and study are typical American eaters doing what typical Amer-90 «>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
ican eaters do: trying to eat a little less of this nutrient, a little 
more of that one, depending on the latest thinking. But the 
overall dietary pattern is treated as a more or less unalterable 
given. Which is why it probably should not surprise us that 
the findings of such research should be so modest, equivocal, 
and confusing. 
But what about the elephant in the room—this pattern of 
eating that we call the Western diet? In the midst of our deep­
ening confusion about nutrition, it might be useful to step back 
and gaze upon it—review what we do know about the Western 
diet and its effects on our health. What we know is that people 
who eat the way we do in the West today suffer substantially 
higher rates of cancer, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and 
obesity than people eating any number of different traditional 
diets. We also know that when people come to the West and 
adopt our way of eating, these diseases soon follow, and often, 
as in the case of the Aborigines and other native populations, 
in a particularly virulent form. 
The outlines of this story—the story of the so-called West­
ern diseases and their link to the Western diet—we first learned 
in the early decades of the twentieth century. That was when 
a handful of dauntless European and American medical pro­
fessionals working with a wide variety of native populations 
around the world began noticing the almost complete absence 
of the chronic diseases that had recently become common­
place in the West. Albert Schweitzer and Denis P. Burkitt in Af­
rica, Robert McCarrison in India, Samuel Hutton among the 
Eskimos in Labrador, the anthropologist Ales Hrdlicka among 
Native Americans, and the dentist Weston A. Price among a THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM *>> 91 
dozen different groups all over the world (including Peruvian 
Indians, Australian Aborigines, and Swiss mountaineers) sent 
back much the same news. They compiled lists, many of which 
appeared in medical journals, of the common diseases they'd 
been hard pressed to find in the native populations they had 
treated or studied: little to no heart disease, diabetes, cancer, 
obesity, hypertension, or stroke; no appendicitis, diverticulitis, 
malformed dental arches, or tooth decay; no varicose veins, 
ulcers, or hemorrhoids. These disorders suddenly appeared to 
these researchers under a striking new light, as suggested by 
the name given to them by the British doctor Denis Burkitt, 
who worked in Africa during World War II: He proposed that 
we call them Western diseases. The implication was that these 
very different sorts of diseases were somehow linked and might 
even have a common cause. 
Several of these researchers were on hand to witness the 
arrival of the Western diseases in isolated populations, typi­
cally, as Albert Schweitzer wrote, among "natives living more 
and more after the manner of the whites." Some noted that 
the Western diseases followed closely on the heels of the ar­
rival of Western foods, particularly refined flour and sugar and 
other kinds of "store food." They observed too that when one 
Western disease arrived on the scene, so did most of the others, 
and often in the same order: obesity followed by type 2 dia­
betes followed by hypertension and stroke followed by heart 
disease. 
In the years before World War II the medical world en­
tertained a lively conversation on the subject of the Western 
diseases and what their rise might say about our increasingly 92 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
industrialized way of life. The concept's pioneers believed there 
were novelties in the modern diet to which native populations 
were poorly adapted, though they did not necessarily agree on 
exactly which novelty might be the culprit. Burkitt, for exam­
ple, believed it was the lack of fiber in the modern diet while 
McCarrison, a British army doctor, focused on refined carbo­
hydrates while still others blamed meat eating and saturated fat 
or, in Price's case, the advent of processed food and industrially 
grown crops deficient in vitamins and minerals. 
Not everyone, though, bought into the idea that chronic 
disease was a by-product of Western lifestyles and, in particu­
lar, that the industrialization of our food was taking a toll on 
our health. One objection to the theory was genetic: Different 
races were apt to be susceptible to different diseases went the 
argument; white people were disposed to heart attacks, brown 
people to things like leprosy. Yet as Burkitt and others pointed 
out, blacks living in America suffered from the same chronic 
diseases as whites living there. Simply by moving to places like 
America, immigrants from nations with low rates of chronic 
disease seemed to quickly acquire them. 
The other objection to the concept of Western diseases, 
one you sometimes still hear, was demographic. The reason 
we see so much chronic disease in the West is because these 
are illnesses that appear relatively late in life, and with the con­
quest of infectious disease early in the twentieth century, we're 
simply living long enough to get them. In this view, chronic 
disease is the inevitable price of a long life. But while it is true 
that our life expectancy has improved dramatically since 1900 
(rising in the United States from forty-nine to seventy-seven THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM 0> 93 
years), most of that gain is attributed to the fact that more of 
us are surviving infancy and childhood; the life expectancy of 
a sixty-five-year-old in 1900 was only about six years less than 
that of a sixty-five-year-old living today* When you adjust for 
age, rates of chronic diseases like cancer and type 2 diabetes are 
considerably higher today than they were in 1900. That is, the 
chances that a sixty- or seventy-year-old suffers from cancer or 
type 2 diabetes are far greater today than they were a century 
ago. (The same may well be true of heart disease, but because 
heart disease statistics from 1900 are so sketchy, we can't say 
for sure.) 
Cancer and heart disease and so many of the other Western 
diseases are by now such an accepted part of modern life that 
it's hard for us to believe this wasn't always or even necessar­
ily the case. These days most of us think of chronic diseases 
as being a little like the weather—one of life's givens—and 
so count ourselves lucky that, compared to the weather, the 
diseases at least are more amenable to intervention by modern 
medicine. We think of them strictly in medical rather than his­
torical, much less evolutionary, terms. But during the decades 
before World War II, when the industrialization of so many 
*It may be that the explosion of chronic diseases during the twentieth century 
is now taking a toll on American life expectancy. In 2007, the CIA World Factbook 
ranked the United States forty-fifth for life expectancy at birth, below 
countries like Israel, Jordan, Bosnia, and Bermuda. Future gains in life 
expectancy depend largely on how much we can extend life among the 
elderly—exceedingly difficult, when you consider that the incidence of 
diabetes in people over seventy-five is projected to increase 336 percent 
during the first half of this century. 94 «X IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
aspects of our lives was still fairly fresh, the price of "progress," 
especially to our health, seemed more obvious to many people 
and therefore more open to question. 
One of the most intrepid questioners of the prewar period 
was Weston A. Price, a Canadian-born dentist, of all things, 
who became preoccupied with one of those glaring questions 
we can't even see anymore. Much like heart disease, chronic 
problems of the teeth are by now part of the furniture of mod­
ern life. But if you stop to think about it, it is odd that ev­
eryone should need a dentist and that so many of us should 
need braces, root canals, extractions of wisdom teeth, and all 
the other routine procedures of modern mouth maintenance. 
Could the need for so much remedial work on a body part cru­
cially involved in an activity as critical to our survival as eating 
reflect a design defect in the human body, some sort of over­
sight of natural selection? This seems unlikely. Weston Price, 
who was born in 1870 in a farming community south of Ot­
tawa and built a dental practice in Cleveland, Ohio, had person­
ally witnessed the rapid increase in dental problems beginning 
around the turn of the last century and was convinced that the 
cause could be found in the modern diet. (He wasn't the only 
one: In the 1930s an argument raged in medical circles as to 
whether hygiene or nutrition was the key to understanding 
and treating tooth decay. A public debate on that very ques­
tion in Manhattan in 1934 attracted an overflow audience of 
thousands. That hygiene ultimately won the day had as much 
to do with the needs of the dental profession as it did with 
good science; the problem of personal hygiene was easier, and THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM 95 
far more profitable, to address than that of the diet and entire 
food system.) 
In the 1930s, Price closed down his dental practice so he 
could devote all his energies to solving the mystery of the West­
ern diet. He went looking for what he called control groups— 
isolated populations that had not yet been exposed to modern 
foods. He found them in the mountains of Switzerland and 
Peru, the lowlands of Africa, the bush of Australia, the outer 
islands of the Hebrides, the Everglades of Florida, the coast of 
Alaska, the islands of Melanesia and the Torres Strait, and the 
jungles of New Guinea and New Zealand, among other places. 
Price made some remarkable discoveries, which he wrote up 
in articles for medical journals (with titles like "New Light 
on Modern Physical Degeneration from Field Studies Among 
Primitive Races") and ultimately summarized in his 510-page 
tome, Nutrition and Physical Degeneration, published in 1939. 
Although his research was taken seriously during his life­
time, Weston Price has been all but written out of the history 
of twentieth-century science. The single best account I could 
find of his life and work is an unpublished master's thesis by 
Martin Renner, a graduate student in history at UC Santa Cruz.* 
This neglect might owe to the fact that Price was a dentist, and 
more of an amateur scientist in the nineteenth-century mode 
than a professional medical researcher. It might also be because 
he could sometimes come across as a bit of a crackpot—one 
*"Modern Civilization, Nutritional Dark Age: Weston A. Price's Ecological 
Critique of the Industrial Food System," 2005. 96 •&> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
of his articles was titled "Dentistry and Race Destiny." His dis­
cussions of "primitive races" are off-putting to say the least, 
though he ended up a harsh critic of "modern civilization," 
convinced his primitives had more to teach us than the other 
way around. He was also something of a monomaniac on the 
subject of diet, certain that poor nutrition could explain not 
just tooth decay and heart disease but just about everything else 
that bedeviled humankind, including juvenile delinquency, the 
collapse of civilizations, and war. 
Still, the data he painstakingly gathered from his control 
groups, and the lines of connection he was able to trace, not 
only between diet and health but also between the way a peo­
ple produces food and that food's nutritional quality, remain 
valuable today. Indeed, his research is even more valuable today 
than in 1939, because most of the groups he studied have 
long since vanished or adopted more Western ways of eating. 
If you want to study the Western diet today, control groups 
are few and far between. (You can of course create them, as 
Kerin O'Dea did in Australia.) Price's work also points the way 
toward a protoecological understanding of food that will be 
useful as we try to escape the traps of nutritionism. 
So what did Price learn? First, that isolated populations 
eating a wide variety of traditional diets had no need of den­
tists whatsoever. (Well, almost no need of dentists: The "sturdy 
mountaineers" of Switzerland, who never met a toothbrush, 
had teeth covered in a greenish slime—but underneath that 
Price found perfectly formed teeth virtually free of decay.) 
Wherever he found an isolated primitive race that had not yet 
encountered the "displacing foods of modern commerce"—by THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM Oi 97 
which he meant refined flour, sugar, canned and chemically 
preserved foods, and vegetable oils—he found little or no evi­
dence of "modern degeneration"—by which he meant chronic 
disease, tooth decay, and malformed dental arches. Either there 
was something present in the Western diet that led to these 
problems or there was something absent from it. 
Wherever Price went he took pictures of teeth and collected 
samples of food, which he sent home to Cleveland to be ana­
lyzed for macronutrient and vitamin content. He found that his 
native populations were eating a diet substantially higher in vi­
tamins A and D than that of modern Americans—on average ten 
times as much. This owed partly to the fact that, as was already 
understood by the 1930s, the processing of foods typically 
robs them of nutrients, vitamins especially. Store food is food 
designed to be stored and transported over long distances, and 
the surest way to make food more stable and less vulnerable 
to pests is to remove the nutrients from it. In general, calories 
are much easier to transport—in the form of refined grain or 
sugar—than nutrients, which are liable to deteriorate or attract 
the attention of bacteria, insects, and rodents, all keenly inter­
ested in nutrients. (More so, apparently, than we are.) Price 
concluded that modern civilization had sacrificed much of the 
quality of its food in the interests of quantity and shelf life. 
Price identified no single ideal diet—he found populations 
that thrived on seafood diets, dairy diets, meat diets, and diets 
in which fruits, vegetables, and grain predominated.The Masai 
of Africa consumed virtually no plant foods at all, subsisting 
on meat, blood, and milk. Seafaring groups in the Hebrides 
consumed no dairy at all, subsisting on a diet consisting largely 98 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
of seafood and oats made into porridges and cakes. The Eski­
mos he interviewed lived on raw fish, game meat, fish roe, 
and blubber, seldom eating anything remotely green. Along 
the Nile near Ethiopia, Price encountered what he judged to be 
the healthiest populations of all: tribes that subsisted on milk, 
meat, and blood from pastured cattle as well as animal food 
from the Nile River. Price found groups that ate diets of wild 
animal flesh to be generally healthier than the agriculturists 
who relied on cereals and other plant foods; the agriculturists 
tended to have somewhat higher levels of tooth decay (though 
still low by our standards). Price noted that many of the peoples 
he visited particularly prized organ meats, in which he found 
high levels of fat-soluble vitamins, minerals, and "activator X," 
a term of his own invention that is probably vitamin K2. Almost 
everywhere he went, he noted the high value people placed on 
seafood, which even mountain-dwelling groups would go to 
great lengths to procure, trading with coastal tribes for dried 
fish eggs and such. But the common denominator of good 
health, he concluded, was to eat a traditional diet consisting of 
fresh foods from animals and plants grown on soils that were 
themselves rich in nutrients. 
Price paid special attention to the quality of animal-based 
foods and its link to what those animals ate. He compared 
the vitamin content of butter produced from cows grazing on 
spring grass to that of animals on winter forages; not only were 
levels of vitamins A and D much higher in the yellower butter 
of the pastured animals but the health of the people who sub­
sisted on those animals was better too. Price believed the qual­
ity of the soil was a key to health, and in 1932, he published THE ELEPHANT IN THE ROOM Oi 99 
a paper titled "New Light on Some Relationships Between Soil 
Mineral Deficiencies, Low Vitamin Foods, and Some Degenera­
tive Diseases." 
In making such connections between the quality of soil and 
grass and the health of the human eaters at the top of the food 
chain, Price was advancing a critique of the industrialized ag­
riculture just getting established in the thirties. In this he was 
not alone: Around the same time, the English agronomist Sir 
Albert Howard, the philosophical father of the organic farming 
movement, was also arguing that the industrialization of agri­
culture—in particular the introduction of synthetic nitrogen 
fertilizer, which simplified the chemistry of the soil—would 
eventually take its toll on our health. Howard urged that we 
regard "the whole problem of health in soil, plant, animal and 
man as one great subject." When Howard wrote these words, 
this was still litde more than a working hypothesis; Weston Price 
had begun to put some empirical foundations beneath it. 
Price was inching toward an ecological understanding of 
diet and health that was well ahead of his time. He under­
stood that, ultimately, eating linked us to the earth and its el­
ements as well as to the energy of the sun. "The dinner we 
have eaten tonight," he told his audience in a 1928 lecture, 
"was a part of the sun but a few months ago." Industrial food 
both obscured these links and attenuated them. In lengthening 
the food chain so that we could feed great cities from distant 
soils, we were breaking the "rules of nature" at least twice: by 
robbing nutrients from the soils the foods had been grown in 
and then squandering those nutrients by processing the foods. 
Compared to the native peoples Price studied, many of whom 100 <» IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
took pains to return nutrients to the local soil on which they 
absolutely depended, "our modern civilization returns exceed­
ingly little of what it borrows. Vast fleets are busy carrying 
the limited minerals of far-flung districts to distant markets." 
Renner documents how Price eventually came to see the prob­
lem of diet and health as a problem of ecological dysfunction. 
By breaking the links among local soils, local foods, and local 
peoples, the industrial food system disrupted the circular flow 
of nutrients through the food chain. Whatever the advantages 
of the new industrial system, it could no longer meet the bio­
chemical requirements of the human body, which, not having 
had time to adapt, was failing in new ways. 
Whether or not you're willing to travel quite that far with 
Dr. Price, he and all the other early twentieth-century explorers 
of the pre-Western diet returned to civilization with the same 
simple and devastating piece of news, one that seems hard to 
deny: The human animal is adapted to, and apparendy can thrive 
on, an extraordinary range of different diets, but the Western 
diet, however you define it, does not seem to be one of them. 
As it happened, the ecological critique of industrial civili­
zation that Weston Price was advancing in the thirties would 
not survive World War II. The space for such writing—occu­
pied also by Sir Howard and Lord Northbourne in England 
and the American agrarians—closed down very shortly after 
Price published Nutrition and Physical Degeneration in 1939. People 
would soon lose their patience for attacks on "industrial civi­
lization," that being precisely what they were depending on to 
save them in wartime. By the time the war ended, that indus­
trial civilization had consolidated its hold and in the process THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW *>> 101 
become much more sure of itself. In the years immediately 
after the war, industrial agriculture (which benefited from the 
peacetime conversion of munitions to chemical fertilizer and 
nerve gas research to pesticides) also consolidated its position; 
there would soon be no other kind. Weston Price and his fel­
low students of the Western diseases were largely forgotten. 
No one was much interested in looking back or celebrating 
the wisdom of primitive groups that were themselves quickly 
disappearing or being assimilated; even the Aborigines were 
moving to the city. 
As for the Western diseases, they hadn't gone away—indeed, 
rates of heart disease exploded immediately after the war—but 
now they became the responsibility of modern medicine and 
reductionist science. Nutritionism became the accepted set of 
terms in which to conduct all conversations about diet and 
health. It wouldn't be until the late 1960s, with the rise of or­
ganic agriculture, that searching questions about the industrial 
food chain would be posed again. 
THREE « THE INDUSTRIALIZATION 
OF EATING: WHAT WE 
DO KNOW 
I've dwelled on the all-but-forgotten ideas of people like 
Weston Price and Sir Albert Howard—ecological thinkers 
about the human food chain—because they point us down a 102 «i IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
path that might lead the way out of the narrow, and ultimately 
unhelpful, confines of nutritionism: of thinking about food 
strictly in terms of its chemical constituents. What we need 
now, it seems to me, is to create a broader, more ecological— 
and more cultural—view of food. So let us try. 
What would happen if we were to start thinking about 
food as less of a thing and more of a relationship? In nature, 
that is of course precisely what eating has always been: rela­
tionships among species in systems we call food chains, or 
food webs, that reach all the way down to the soil. Species 
coevolve with the other species that they eat, and very often 
there develops a relationship of interdependence: I'll feed you if 
you spread around my genes. A gradual process of mutual adaptation 
transforms something like an apple or a squash into a nutri­
tious and tasty food for an animal. Over time and through 
trial and error, the plant becomes tastier (and often more 
conspicuous) in order to gratify the animal's needs and de­
sires, while the animal gradually acquires whatever digestive 
tools (enzymes, for example) it needs to make optimal use of 
the plant. 
Similarly, the milk of cows did not start out as a nutritious 
food for humans; in fact, it made them sick until people who 
lived around cows evolved the ability to digest milk as adults. 
The gene for the production of a milk-digesting enzyme called 
lactase used to switch off in humans shortly after weaning 
until about five thousand years ago, when a mutation that kept 
the gene switched on appeared and quickly spread through a 
population of animal herders in north-central Europe. Why? 
Because the people possessing the new mutation then had ac-THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW Oi 103 
cess to a terrifically nutritious new food source and as a conse­
quence were able to produce more offspring than the people 
who lacked it. This development proved much to the advantage 
of both the milk drinkers and the cows, whose numbers and 
habitat (and health) greatly improved as a result of this new 
symbiotic relationship. 
Health is, among other things, the product of being in 
these sorts of relationships in a food chain—a great many such 
relationships in the case of an omnivorous creature like man. 
It follows that when the health of one part of the food chain is 
disturbed, it can affect all the other creatures in it. If the soil is 
sick or in some way deficient, so will be the grasses that grow 
in that soil and the cattle that eat the grasses and the people 
who drink the milk from them. This is precisely what Weston 
Price and Sir Howard had in mind when they sought to con­
nect the seemingly distant realms of soil and human health. 
Our personal health cannot be divorced from the health of the 
entire food web. 
In many cases, long familiarity between foods and their eat­
ers leads to elaborate systems of communication up and down 
the food chain so that a creature's senses come to recognize 
foods as suitable by their taste and smell and color. Very often 
these signals are "sent" by the foods themselves, which may 
have their own reasons for wanting to be eaten. Ripeness in 
fruit is often signaled by a distinctive smell (an appealing scent 
that can travel over distances), or color (one that stands out 
from the general green), or taste (typically sweet). Ripeness, 
which is the moment when the seeds of the plant are ready 
to go off and germinate, typically coincides with the greatest 104 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
concentration of nutrients in a fruit, so the interests of the 
plant (for transportation) align with those of the plant eater 
(for nutriment). Our bodies, having received these signals and 
determined this fruit is good to eat, now produce in anticipa­
tion precisely the enzymes and acids needed to break it down. 
Health depends heavily on knowing how to read these bio­
logical signals: This looks ripe; this smells spoiled; that's one slick-looking 
cow. This is much easier to do when you have long experience 
of a food and much harder when a food has been expressly 
designed to deceive your senses with, say, artificial flavors or 
synthetic sweeteners. Foods that lie to our senses are one of the 
most challenging features of the Western diet. 
Note that these ecological relationships are, at least in the 
first instance, between eaters and whole foods, not nutrients 
or chemicals. Even though the foods in question eventually get 
broken down in our bodies into simple chemical compounds, 
as corn is reduced mostly to simple sugars, the qualities of the 
whole foods are not unimportant. The amount and structure 
of the fiber in that corn, for example, will determine such 
things as the speed at which the sugars in it will be released 
and absorbed, something we've learned is critical to insulin 
metabolism. The chemist will tell you the starch in corn is on 
its way to becoming glucose in the blood, but that reductive 
understanding overlooks the complex and variable process by 
which that happens. Contrary to the nutrition label, not all 
carbohydrates are created equal. 
Put another way, our bodies have a long-standing and sus­
tainable relationship to corn that they do not have to high-
fructose corn syrup. Such a relationship with corn syrup might THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW « 105 
*Glucose is a sugar molecule that is the body's main source of energy; most 
carbohydrates are broken down to glucose during digestion. Fructose is a 
different form of sugar, commonly found in fruit. Sucrose, or table sugar, is 
a disaccharide consisting of a molecule of glucose joined to a molecule of 
fructose. develop someday (as people evolve superhuman insulin systems 
to cope with regular floods of pure fructose and glucose*), but 
for now the relationship leads to ill health because our bodies 
don't know how to handle these biological novelties. In much 
the same way, human bodies that can cope with chewing coca 
leaves—a longstanding relationship between native people and 
the coca plant in parts of South America—cannot cope with 
cocaine or crack, even though the same active ingredients are 
present in all three. Reductionism as a way of understanding 
food or drugs may be harmless, even necessary, but reduction­
ism in practice—reducing food or drug plants to their most 
salient chemical compounds—can lead to problems. 
Looking at eating, and food, through this ecological lens 
opens a whole new perspective on exactly what the Western 
diet is: a radical and, at least in evolutionary terms, abrupt set 
of changes over the course of the last 150 years, not just to our 
foodstuffs but also to our food relationships, all the way from 
the soil to the meal. The rise of the ideology of nutritionism is 
itself part of that change. When we think of a species' "envi­
ronment," we usually think in terms of things like geography, 
predators and prey, and the weather. But of course one of the 
most critical components of any creature's environment is the 
nature of the food available to it and its relationships to the 
species it eats. Much is at stake when a creature's food environ-106 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
ment changes. For us, the first big change came ten thousand 
years ago with the advent of agriculture. (And it devastated our 
health, leading to a panoply of deficiencies and infectious dis­
eases that we've only managed to get under control in the last 
century or so.) The biggest change in our food environment 
since then? The advent of the modern diet. 
To get a better grip on the nature of these changes is to 
begin to understand how we might alter our relationship to 
food—for the better, for our health. These changes have been 
numerous and far reaching, but consider as a start these five 
fundamental transformations to our foods and ways of eating. 
All of them can be reversed, if not perhaps so easily in the 
food system as a whole, certainly in the life and diet of any 
individual eater, and without, I hasten to add, returning to the 
bush or taking up hunting and gathering. 
1 ) From Whole Foods to Refined 
The case of corn points to one of the key features of the mod­
ern diet: a shift toward increasingly refined foods, especially 
carbohydrates. People have been refining cereal grains since at 
least the Industrial Revolution, favoring white flour and white 
rice over brown, even at the price of lost nutrients. Part of the 
reason was prestige: Because for many years only the wealthy 
could afford refined grains, they acquired a certain glamour. 
Refining grains extends their shelf life (precisely because they 
are less nutritious to the pests that compete with us for their 
calories) and makes them easier to digest by removing the THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW Oi 107 
fiber that ordinarily slows the release of their sugars. Also, the 
finer that flour is ground, the more surface area is exposed to 
digestive enzymes, so the quicker the starches turn to glucose. 
A great deal of modern industrial food can be seen as an ex­
tension and intensification of this practice as food processors 
find ways to deliver glucose—the brain's preferred fuel—ever 
more swiftly and efficiently. Sometimes this is precisely the 
point, as when corn is refined into corn syrup; other times, 
though, it is an unfortunate by-product of processing food for 
other reasons. 
Viewed from this perspective, the history of refining whole 
foods has been a history of figuring out ways not just to make 
them more durable and portable, but also how to concentrate 
their energy and, in a sense, speed them up. This acceleration 
took a great leap forward with the introduction in Europe 
around 1870 of rollers (made from iron, steel, or porcelain) 
for grinding grain. Perhaps more than any other single devel­
opment, this new technology, which by 1880 had replaced 
grinding by stone throughout Europe and America, marked the 
beginning of the industrialization of our food—reducing it to 
its chemical essence and speeding up its absorption. Refined 
flour is the first fast food. 
Before the roller-milling revolution, wheat was ground be­
tween big stone wheels, which could get white flour only so 
white. That's because while stone grinding removed the bran 
from the wheat kernel (and therefore the largest portion of 
the fiber), it couldn't remove the germ, or embryo, which 
contains volatile oils that are rich in nutrients. The stone wheels 
merely crushed the germ and released the oil. This had the ef-108 0> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
feet of tinting the flour yellowish gray (the yellow is carotene) 
and shortening its shelf life, because the oil, once exposed 
to the air, soon oxidized—turned rancid. That's what people 
could see and smell, and they didn't like it. What their senses 
couldn't tell them, however, is that the germ contributed some 
of the most valuable nutrients to the flour, including much 
of its protein, folic acid, and other B vitamins; carotenes and 
other antioxidants; and omega-3 fatty acids, which are espe­
cially prone to rancidity. 
The advent of rollers that made it possible to remove the 
germ and then grind the remaining endosperm (the big packet 
of starch and protein in a seed) exceptionally fine solved the 
problem of stability and color. Now just about everyone could 
afford snowy-white flour that could keep on a shelf for many 
months. No longer did every town need its own mill, because 
flour could now travel great distances. (Plus it could be ground 
year-round by large companies in big cities: Heavy stone mills, 
which typically relied on water power, operated mosdy when 
and where rivers flowed; steam engines could drive the new 
rollers whenever and wherever.) Thus was one of the main 
staples of the Western diet cut loose from its moorings in place 
and time and marketed on the basis of image rather than nutri­
tional value. In this, white flour was a modern industrial food, 
one of the first. 
The problem was that this gorgeous white powder was nu­
tritionally worthless, or nearly so. Much the same was now true 
for corn flour and white rice, the polishing of which (i.e., the 
removing of its most nutritious parts) was perfected around 
the same time. Wherever these refining technologies came into THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW & 109 
widespread use, devastating epidemics of pellagra and beriberi 
soon followed. Both are diseases caused by deficiencies in the 
B vitamins that the germ had contributed to the diet. But the 
sudden absence from bread of several other micronutrients, as 
well as omega-3 fatty acids, probably also took its toll on pub­
lic health, particularly among the urban poor of Europe, many 
of whom ate little but bread. 
In the 1930s, with the discovery of vitamins, scientists fig­
ured out what had happened, and millers began fortifying re­
fined grain with B vitamins. This took care of the most obvious 
deficiency diseases. More recently, scientists recognized that 
many of us also had a deficiency of folic acid in our diet, and 
in 1996 public health authorities ordered millers to start add­
ing folic acid to flour as well. But it would take longer still for 
science to realize that this "Wonder Bread" strategy of supple­
mentation, as one nutritionist has called it, might not solve 
all the problems caused by the refining of grain. Deficiency 
diseases are much easier to trace and treat (indeed, medicine's 
success in curing deficiency diseases is an important source of 
nutritionism's prestige) than chronic diseases, and it turns out 
that the practice of refining carbohydrates is implicated in sev­
eral of these chronic diseases as well—diabetes, heart disease, 
and certain cancers. 
The story of refined grain stands as a parable about the 
limits of reductionist science when applied to something as 
complex as food. For years now nutritionists have known that a 
diet high in whole grains reduces one's risk for diabetes, heart 
disease, and cancer. (This seems to be true even after you cor­
rect for the fact that the kind of people who eat lots of whole 110 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
grains today probably have lifestyles healthier in other ways 
as well.) Different nutritionists have given the credit for the 
benefits of whole grain to different nutrients: the fiber in the 
bran, the folic acid and other B vitamins in the germ, or the an­
tioxidants or the various minerals. In 2003 the American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition* published an unusually nonreductionist study 
demonstrating that no one of those nutrients alone can explain 
the benefits of whole-grain foods: The typical reductive analy­
sis of isolated nutrients could not explain the improved health 
of the whole-grain eaters. 
For the study, University of Minnesota epidemiologists 
David R. Jacobs and Lyn M. Steffen reviewed the relevant re­
search and found a large body of evidence that a diet rich in 
whole grains did in fact reduce mortality from all causes. But 
what was surprising was that even after adjusting for levels 
of dietary fiber, vitamin E, folic acid, phytic acid, iron, zinc, 
magnesium, and manganese in the diet (all the good things 
we know are in whole grains), they found an additional health 
benefit to eating whole grains that none of the nutrients alone 
or even together could explain. That is, subjects getting the 
same amounts of these nutrients from other sources were not 
as healthy as the whole-grain eaters. "This analysis suggests 
that something else in the whole grain protects against death." 
The authors concluded, somewhat vaguely but suggestively, 
that "the various grains and their parts act synergistically" and 
•David R. Jacobs and Lyn M. Steffen, "Nutrients, Foods, and Dietary Patterns 
as Exposures in Research: A Framework for Food Synergy," American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition, 2003; 78 (suppl): 508S-13S. THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW «•> 111 
suggested that their colleagues begin paying attention to the 
concept of "food synergy." Here, then, is support for an idea 
revolutionary by the standards of nutritionism: A whole food 
might be more than the sum of its nutrient parts. 
Suffice it to say, this proposition has not been enthusiasti­
cally embraced by the food industry, and probably won't be 
any time soon. As I write, Coca-Cola is introducing vitamin-
fortified sodas, extending the Wonder Bread strategy of supple­
mentation to junk food in its purest form. (Wonder Soda?) 
The big money has always been in processing foods, not sell­
ing them whole, and the industry's investment in the reduc­
tionist approach to food is probably safe. The fact is, there is 
something in us that loves a refined carbohydrate, and that 
something is the human brain. The human brain craves car­
bohydrates reduced to their energy essence, which is to say 
pure glucose. Once industry figured out how to transform the 
seeds of grasses into the chemical equivalent of sugar, there 
was probably no turning back. 
And then of course there is sugar itself, the ultimate refined 
carbohydrate, which began flooding the marketplace and the 
human metabolism around the same time as refined flour. In 
1874, England lifted its tariffs on imported sugar, the price 
dropped by half, and by the end of the nineteenth century fully 
a sixth of the calories in the English diet were coming from 
sugar, with much of the rest coming from refined flour. 
With the general availability of cheap pure sugar, the 
human metabolism now had to contend not only with a con­
stant flood of glucose, but also with more fructose than it had 
ever before encountered, because sugar—sucrose—is half 112 *>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
fructose.* (Per capita fructose consumption has increased 25 
percent in the past thirty years.) In the natural world, fructose 
is a rare and precious thing, typically encountered seasonally 
in ripe fruit, when it comes packaged in a whole food full of 
fiber (which slows its absorption) and valuable micronutrients. 
It's no wonder we've been hardwired by natural selection to 
prize sweet foods: Sugar as it is ordinarily found in nature— 
in fruits and some vegetables—gives us a slow-release form 
of energy accompanied by minerals and all sorts of crucial 
micronutrients we can get nowhere else. (Even in honey, the 
purest form of sugar found in nature, you find some valuable 
micronutrients.) 
One of the most momentous changes in the American diet 
since 1909 (when the USDA first began keeping track) has 
been the increase in the percentage of calories coming from 
sugars, from 13 percent to 20 percent. Add to that the percent­
age of calories coming from carbohydrates (roughly 40 per­
cent, or ten servings, nine of which are refined) and Americans 
are consuming a diet that is at least half sugars in one form 
or another—calories providing virtually nothing but energy. 
The energy density of these refined carbohydrates contributes 
to obesity in two ways. First, we consume many more calo­
ries per unit of food; the fiber that's been removed from these 
foods is precisely what would have made us feel full and stop 
*Fructose is metabolized differently from glucose; the body doesn't respond to 
it by producing insulin to convey it into cells to be used as energy. Rather, it is 
metabolized in the liver, which turns it first into glucose and then, if there is 
no call for glucose, into triglycerides—fat. THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW <» 113 
eating. Also, the flash flood of glucose causes insulin levels to 
spike and then, once the cells have taken all that glucose out 
of circulation, drop precipitously, making us think we need to 
eat again. 
While the widespread acceleration of the Western diet has 
given us the instant gratification of sugar, in many people— 
especially those newly exposed to it—the speediness of this 
food overwhelms the ability of insulin to process it, leading 
to type 2 diabetes and all the other chronic diseases associ­
ated with metabolic syndrome. As one nutrition expert put it 
to me, "We're in the middle of a national experiment in the 
mainlining of glucose." And don't forget the flood of fructose, 
which may represent an even greater evolutionary novelty, and 
therefore challenge to the human metabolism, than all that 
glucose. 
It is probably no accident that rates of type 2 diabetes are 
lower among ethnic Europeans, who have had longer than 
other groups to accustom their metabolisms to fast-release re­
fined carbohydrates:Their food environment changed first.*To 
encounter such a diet for the first time, as when people accus­
tomed to a more traditional diet come to America or when fast 
*In the past, changes in the food environment have led to measurable changes 
in human biology over time. A recent study found that populations eating a 
high-starch diet have more copies of a gene coding for amylase, the enzyme 
needed to break down starch. The authors of the study suggest that natural 
selection has favored the gene in those populations that began eating cereal 
grains after the birth of agriculture. George H. Perry, et al, "Diet and the 
Evolution of Human Amylase Gene Copy Number Variation," Nature Genetics 
published online September 9, 2007; doi:10.1038/ng2123. 114 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
food comes to them, delivers a shock to the system. This shock 
is what public health experts mean by the nutrition transition, 
and it can be deadly. 
So here, then, is the first momentous change in the Western 
diet that may help to explain why it makes some people so 
sick: Supplanting tested relationships to the whole foods with 
which we coevolved over many thousands of years, it asks our 
bodies now to relate to, and deal with, a very small handful of 
efficiently delivered nutrients that have been torn from their 
food context. Our ancient evolutionary relationship with the 
seeds of grasses and fruit of plants has given way, abruptly, to 
a rocky marriage with glucose and fructose. 
2) From Complexity to Simplicity 
At every level, from the soil to the plate, the industrialization 
of the food chain has involved a process of chemical and bio­
logical simplification. It starts with industrial fertilizers, which 
grossly simplify the biochemistry of the soil. In the wake of 
Liebig's identification of the big three macronutrients that 
plants need to grow—nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium 
(NPK)—and Fritz Haber's invention of a method for synthesiz­
ing nitrogen fertilizer from fossil fuels, agricultural soils began 
receiving large doses of the big three but little else. Just like 
Liebig, whose focus on the macronutrients in the human diet 
failed to take account of the important role played by micro­
nutrients such as vitamins, Haber completely overlooked the 
importance of biological activity in the soil: the contribution THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW « 115 
to plant health of the complex underground ecosystem of soil 
microbes, earthworms, and mycorrhizal fungi. Harsh chemical 
fertilizers (and pesticides) depress or destroy this biological 
activity, forcing crops to subsist largely on a simple ration of 
NPK. Plants can live on this fast-food diet of chemicals, but it 
leaves them more vulnerable to pests and diseases and appears 
to diminish their nutritional quality. 
It stands to reason that a chemically simplified soil would 
produce chemically simplified plants. Since the widespread 
adoption of chemical fertilizers in the 1950s, the nutritional 
quality of produce in America has declined substantially, ac­
cording to figures gathered by the USDA, which has tracked the 
nutrient content of various crops since then. Some researchers 
blame this decline on the condition of the soil; others cite the 
tendency of modern plant breeding, which has consistently 
selected for industrial characteristics such as yield rather than 
nutritional quality. (The next section will take up the trade-off 
between quality and quantity in industrial food.) 
The trend toward simplification of our food continues up 
the chain. As we've seen, processing whole foods—refining, 
chemically preserving, and canning them—depletes them of 
many nutrients, a few of which are then added back: B vita­
mins in refined flour, vitamins and minerals in breakfast cereal 
and bread. Fortifying processed foods with missing nutrients 
is surely better than leaving them out, but food science can 
add back only the small handful of nutrients that food science 
recognizes as important today. What is it overlooking? As the 
whole-grain food synergy study suggests, science doesn't know 
nearly enough to compensate for everything that processing 116 «>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
does to whole foods. We know how to break down a kernel of 
corn or grain of wheat into its chemical parts, but we have no 
idea how to put it back together again. Destroying complexity 
is a lot easier than creating it. 
Simplification of the food chain occurs at the level of spe­
cies diversity too. The astounding variety of foods on offer in 
today's supermarket obscures the fact that the actual number of 
species in the modern diet is shrinking. Thousands of plant and 
animal varieties have fallen out of commerce in the last century 
as industrial agriculture has focused its attentions on a small 
handful of high-yielding (and usually patented) varieties, with 
qualities that suited them to things like mechanical harvesting 
and processing. Half of all the broccoli grown commercially 
in America today is a single variety—Marathon—notable for 
its high yield. The overwhelming majority of the chickens 
raised for meat in America are the same hybrid, the Cornish 
cross; more than 99 percent of the turkeys are Broad-Breasted 
Whites. 
With the rise of industrial agriculture, vast monocultures 
of a tiny group of plants, most of them cereal grains, have re­
placed the diversified farms that used to feed us. A century ago, 
the typical Iowa farm raised more than a dozen different plant 
and animal species: cattle, chickens, corn, hogs, apples, hay, 
oats, potatoes, cherries, wheat, plums, grapes, and pears. Now 
it raises only two: corn and soybeans. This simplification of the 
agricultural landscape leads directly to the simplification of the 
diet, which is now to a remarkable extent dominated by—big 
surprise—corn and soybeans. You may not think you eat a lot 
of corn and soybeans, but you do: 75 percent of the vegetable THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW 0> 117 
oils in your diet come from soy (representing 20 percent of 
your daily calories) and more than half of the sweeteners you 
consume come from corn (representing around 10 percent of 
daily calories). 
Why corn and soy? Because these two plants are among 
nature's most efficient transformers of sunlight and chemical 
fertilizer into carbohydrate energy (in the case of corn) and 
fat and protein (in the case of soy)—if you want to extract the 
maximum amount of macronutrients from the American farm 
belt, corn and soy are the crops to plant. (It helps that the gov­
ernment pays farmers to grow corn and soy, subsidizing every 
bushel they produce.) Most of the corn and soy crop winds 
up in the feed of our food animals (simplifying their diets in 
unhealthy ways, as we'll see), but much of the rest goes into 
processed foods. The business model of the food industry is 
organized around "adding value" to cheap raw materials; its 
genius has been to figure out how to break these two big seeds 
down into their chemical building blocks and then reassemble 
them in myriad packaged food products. With the result that 
today corn contributes 554 calories a day to America's per cap­
ita food supply and soy another 257. Add wheat (768 calories) 
and rice (91) and you can see there isn't a whole lot of room 
left in the American stomach for any other foods. 
Today these four crops account for two thirds of the calo­
ries we eat. When you consider that humankind has histori­
cally consumed some eighty thousand edible species, and that 
three thousand of these have been in widespread use, this rep­
resents a radical simplification of the human diet. Why should 
this concern us? Because humans are omnivores, requiring 118 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
somewhere between fifty and a hundred different chemical 
compounds and elements in order to be healthy. It's hard to 
believe we're getting everything we need from a diet consisting 
largely of processed corn, soybeans, rice, and wheat. 
3) From Quality to Quantity 
While industrial agriculture has made tremendous strides in 
coaxing macronutrients—calories—from the land, it is becom­
ing increasingly clear that these gains in food quantity have 
come at a cost to its quality. This probably shouldn't surprise 
us: Our food system has long devoted its energies to increasing 
yields and selling food as cheaply as possible. It would be too 
much to hope those goals could be achieved without sacrific­
ing at least some of the nutritional quality of our food. 
As mentioned earlier, USDA figures show a decline in the 
nutrient content of the forty-three crops it has tracked since 
the 1950s. In one recent analysis, vitamin C declined by 20 
percent, iron by 15 percent, riboflavin by 38 percent, calcium 
by 16 percent. Government figures from England tell a similar 
story: declines since the fifties of 10 percent or more in levels 
of iron, zinc, calcium, and selenium across a range of food 
crops. To put this in more concrete terms, you now have to eat 
three apples to get the same amount of iron as you would have 
gotten from a single 1940 apple, and you'd have to eat several 
more slices of bread to get your recommended daily allowance 
of zinc than you would have a century ago. 
These examples come from a 2007 report entitled "Still THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW <>> 119 
No Free Lunch" written by Brian Halweil, a researcher for 
Worldwatch, and published by the Organic Center, a research 
institute established by the organic food industry. "American 
agriculture's single-minded focus on increasing yields created 
a blind spot," Halweil writes, "where incremental erosion in 
the nutritional quality of our food . . . has largely escaped the 
notice of scientists, government, and consumers." The result is 
the nutritional equivalent of inflation, such that we have to eat 
more to get the same amount of various essential nutrients. The 
fact that at least 30 percent of Americans have a diet deficient 
in vitamin C, vitamin E, vitamin A, and magnesium surely owes 
more to eating processed foods full of empty calories than it 
does to lower levels of nutrients in the whole foods we aren't 
eating. Still, it doesn't help that the raw materials used in the 
manufacture of processed foods have declined in nutritional 
quality or that when we are eating whole foods, we're getting 
substantially less nutrition per calorie than we used to.* 
Nutritional inflation seems to have two principal causes: 
changes in the way we grow food and changes in the kinds of 
foods we grow. Halweil cites a considerable body of research 
demonstrating that plants grown with industrial fertilizers are 
often nutritionally inferior to the same varieties grown in or­
ganic soils. Why this should be so is uncertain, but there are 
a couple of hypotheses. Crops grown with chemical fertilizers 
*The news of declining nutrient levels in American produce prompted The 
Packer, a trade publication for the produce industry, to suggest that this might 
actually be good for business, because people would now need to eat more 
produce to get the same nutritional benefit. 120 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
grow more quickly, giving them less time and opportunity 
to accumulate nutrients other than the big three (nutrients in 
which industrial soils are apt to be deficient anyway). Also, 
easy access to the major nutrients means that industrial crops 
develop smaller and shallower root systems than organically 
grown plants; deeply rooted plants have access to more soil 
minerals. Biological activity in the soil almost certainly plays a 
role as well; the slow decomposition of organic matter releases 
a wide range of plant nutrients, possibly including compounds 
science hasn't yet identified as important. Also, a biologically 
active soil will have more mycorrhizae, the soil fungi that live 
in symbiosis with plant roots, supplying the plants with min­
erals in exchange for a ration of sugar. 
In addition to these higher levels of minerals, organically 
grown crops have also been found to contain more phyto-
chemicals—the various secondary compounds (including ca-
rotenoids and polyphenols) that plants produce in order to 
defend themselves from pests and diseases, many of which 
turn out to have important antioxidant, antiinflammatory, and 
other beneficial effects in humans. Because plants living on 
organic farms aren't sprayed with synthetic pesticides, they're 
forced to defend themselves, with the result that they tend to 
produce between 10 percent and 50 percent more of these 
valuable secondary compounds than conventionally grown 
plants. 
Some combination of these environmental factors probably 
accounts for at least part of the decline in the nutritional quality 
of conventional crops, but genetics likely plays just as impor­
tant a role. Very simply, we have been breeding crops for yield, THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW 121 
not nutritional quality, and when you breed for one thing, you 
invariably sacrifice another. Halweil cites several studies dem­
onstrating that when older crop varieties are grown side by 
side with modern cultivars, the older ones typically have lower 
yields but substantially higher nutrient levels. USDA researchers 
recently found that breeding to "improve" wheat varieties over 
the past 130 years (a period during which yields of grain per 
acre tripled) had reduced levels of iron by 28 percent and zinc 
and selenium by roughly a third. Similarly, milk from modern 
Holstein cows (in which breeders have managed to more than 
triple daily yield since 1950) has considerably less butterfat 
and other nutrients than that from older, less "improved" vari­
eties like Jersey, Guernsey, and Brown Swiss. 
Clearly the achievements of industrial agriculture have 
come at a cost: It can produce a great many more calories per 
acre, but each of those calories may supply less nutrition than 
it formerly did. And what has happened on the farm has hap­
pened in the food system as a whole as industry has pursued 
the same general strategy of promoting quantity at the expense 
of quality. You don't need to spend much time in an American 
supermarket to figure out that this is a food system organized 
around the objective of selling large quantities of calories as 
cheaply as possible. 
Indeed, doing so has been official U.S. government policy 
since the mid-seventies, when a sharp spike in food prices 
brought protesting housewives into the street and prompted 
the Nixon administration to adopt an ambitious cheap food 
policy. Agricultural policies were rewritten to encourage 
farmers to plant crops like corn, soy, and wheat fencerow to 122 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
fencerow, and it worked: Since 1980, American farmers have 
produced an average of 600 more calories per person per day, 
the price of food has fallen, portion sizes have ballooned, and, 
predictably, we're eating a whole lot more, at least 300 more 
calories a day than we consumed in 1985. What kind of calo­
ries? Nearly a quarter of these additional calories come from 
added sugars (and most of that in the form of high-fructose 
corn syrup) ; roughly another quarter from added fat (most of 
it in the form of soybean oil) ; 46 percent of them from grains 
(mostly refined); and the few calories left (8 percent) from 
fruits and vegetables.* The overwhelming majority of the calo­
ries Americans have added to their diets since 1985—the 93 
percent of them in the form of sugars, fats, and mostly refined 
grains—supply lots of energy but very little of anything else. 
A diet based on quantity rather than quality has ushered 
a new creature onto the world stage: the human being who 
manages to be both overfed and undernourished, two char­
acteristics seldom found in the same body in the long natural 
history of our species. In most traditional diets, when calories 
are adequate, nutrient intake will usually be adequate as well. 
Indeed, many traditional diets are nutrient rich and, at least 
compared to ours, calorie poor. The Western diet has turned 
that relationship upside down. At a health clinic in Oakland, 
California, doctors report seeing overweight children suffering 
from old-time deficiency diseases such as rickets, long thought 
to have been consigned to history's dustheap in the developed 
•These are USDA statistics from FoodReview, Vol. 25, Issue 3, a publication of the 
Economic Research Service at the USDA. THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW 123 
world. But when children subsist on fast food rather than fresh 
fruits and vegetables and drink more soda than milk, the old 
deficiency diseases return—now even in the obese. 
Bruce Ames, the renowned Berkeley biochemist, works 
with kids like this at Children's Hospital and Research Center 
in Oakland. He's convinced that our high-calorie, low-nutrient 
diet is responsible for many chronic diseases, including can­
cer. Ames has found that even subtle micronutrient deficien­
cies—far below the levels needed to produce acute deficiency 
diseases—can cause damage to DNA that may lead to cancer. 
Studying cultured human cells, he's found that "deficiency of 
vitamins C, E, B12, B6, niacin, folic acid, iron or zinc appears 
to mimic radiation by causing single- and double-strand DNA 
breaks, oxidative lesions, or both"—precursors to cancer. "This 
has serious implications, as half of the U.S. population may be 
deficient in at least one of these micronutrients." Most of the 
missing micronutrients are supplied by fruits and vegetables, 
of which only 20 percent of American children and 32 percent 
of adults eat the recommended five daily servings. The cellular 
mechanisms Ames has identified could explain why diets rich 
in vegetables and fruits seem to offer some protection against 
certain cancers. 
Ames also believes, though he hasn't yet proven it, that mi­
cronutrient deficiencies may contribute to obesity. His hypoth­
esis is that a body starved of critical nutrients will keep eating 
in the hope of obtaining them. The absence of these nutrients 
from the diet may "counteract the normal feeling of satiety 
after sufficient calories are eaten" and that such an unrelent­
ing hunger "may be a biological strategy for obtaining miss-124 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
ing nutrients." If Ames is right, then a food system organized 
around quantity rather than quality has a destructive feedback 
loop built into it, such that the more low-quality food one 
eats, the more one wants to eats, in a futile—but highly profit­
able—quest for the absent nutrient. 
4) From Leaves to Seeds 
It's no accident that the small handful of plants we've come to 
rely on are grains (soy is a legume) ; these crops are exception­
ally efficient at transforming sunlight, fertilizer, air, and water 
into macronutrients—carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. These 
macronutrients in turn can be profitably converted into meat, 
dairy, and processed foods of every description. Also, the fact 
that they come in the form of durable seeds which can be 
stored for long periods of time means they can function as 
commodities as well as foods, making these crops particularly 
well adapted to the needs of industrial capitalism. 
The needs of the human eater are a very different matter, 
however. An oversupply of macronutrients, such as we now 
face, itself represents a serious threat to our health, as soaring 
rates of obesity and diabetes indicate. But, as the research of 
Bruce Ames and others suggests, the undersupply of micro-
nutrients may constitute a threat just as grave. Put in the most 
basic terms, we're eating a lot more seeds and a lot fewer leaves 
(as do the animals we depend on), a tectonic dietary shift the 
full implications of which we are just now beginning to recog­
nize. To borrow, again, the nutritionist's reductive vocabulary: THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW 0> 125 
Leaves provide a host of critical nutrients a body can't get from 
a diet of refined seeds. There are the antioxidants and phyto-
chemicals; there is the fiber; and then there are the essential 
omega-3 fatty acids found in leaves, which some researchers 
believe will turn out to be the most crucial missing nutrient 
of all. 
Most people associate omega-3 fatty acids with fish, but 
fish get them originally from green plants (specifically algae), 
which is where they all originate.* Plant leaves produce these 
essential fatty acids (we say they're essential because our bodies 
can't produce them on their own) as part of photosynthesis; 
they occupy the cell membranes of chloroplasts, helping them 
collect light. Seeds contain more of another kind of essential 
fatty acid, omega-6, which serves as a store of energy for the 
developing seedling. These two types of polyunsaturated fats 
perform very different functions in the plant as well as the 
plant eater. In describing their respective roles, I'm going to 
simplify the chemistry somewhat. For a more complete (and 
fascinating) account of the biochemistry of these fats and the 
story of their discovery read Susan Allport's The Queen of Fats."1" 
Omega-3 s appear to play an important role in neurologi­
cal development and processing (the highest concentrations of 
omega-3 s in humans are found in the tissues of the brain and 
*Alpha-linolenic acid is the omega-3 fatty acid found in all green plants; it is 
the most common fat in nature. Fish contain even more valuable "long-chain" 
forms of omega-3, like EPA and DHA, which they get from the algae at the 
base of their food chain. 
tThe Queen of Fats.-Why 0mega-3sWere Removed from the Western Diet and What We Can Do to 
Replace Them (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2006). 126 •O, IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
the eyes), visual acuity (befitting their role in photosynthe­
sis), the permeability of cell walls, the metabolism of glucose, 
and the calming of inflammation. Omega-6s are involved in fat 
storage (which is what they do for the plant), the rigidity of 
cell walls, clotting, and the inflammation response. It helps to 
think of omega-3s as fleet and flexible, omega-6s as sturdy and 
slow. Because the two fatty acids compete with each other for 
space in cell membranes and for the attention of various en­
zymes, the ratio between omega-3s and omega-6s, in the diet 
and in turn in our tissues, may matter more than the absolute 
quantity of either fat. So, too much omega-6 may be just as 
much a problem as too little omega-3. 
And that might well be a problem for people eating a West­
ern diet. As the basis of our diet has shifted from leaves to 
seeds, the ratio of omega-6s to omega-3s in our bodies has 
changed too. The same is true for most of our food animals, 
which industrial agriculture has taken off their accustomed 
diet of green plants and put on a richer diet of seeds. The re­
sult has been a marked decline in the amount of omega-3 s in 
modern meat, dairy products, and eggs, and an increase in the 
amount of omega-6s. At the same time, modern food produc­
tion practices have further diminished the omega-3 s in our 
diet. Omega-3s, being less stable than omega-6s, spoil more 
readily, so the food industry, focused on store food, has been 
strongly disposed against omega-3 s long before we even knew 
what they were. (Omega-3s weren't recognized as essential to 
the human diet until the 1980s—some time after nutrition-
ism's blanket hostility to fat had already taken hold.) For years 
plant breeders have been unwittingly selecting for plants that THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW Oi 127 
produce fewer omega-3s, because such crops don't spoil as 
quickly. (Wild greens like purslane have substantially higher 
levels of omega-3 s than most domesticated plants.) Also, when 
food makers partially hydrogenate oils to render them more 
stable, it is the omega-3s that are eliminated. An executive from 
Frito-Lay told Susan Allport in no uncertain terms that because 
of their tendency to oxidize, omega-3s "cannot be used in 
processed foods." 
Most of the official nutritional advice we've been getting 
since the 1970s has, again unwittingly, helped to push omega-
3 s out of the diet and to elevate levels of omega-6. Besides 
demonizing fats in general, that advice has encouraged us to 
move from saturated fats of animal origin (some of which, like 
butter, actually contain respectable amounts of omega-3 s) to 
seed oils, most of which are much higher in omega-6s (corn 
oil especially), and even more so after partial hydrogénation. 
The move from butter (and especially butter from pastured 
cows) to margarine, besides introducing trans fats to the diet, 
markedly increased omega-6s at the cost of omega-3 s. 
Thus without even realizing what we were doing, we dra­
matically altered the ratio of these two essential fats in our diet 
and our bodies, with the result that the ratio of omega-6 to 
omega-3 in the typical American today stands at more than 
10 to 1. Before the widespread introduction of seed oils at the 
turn of the last century, the ratio was closer to 3 to 1. 
The precise role of these lipids in human health is still not 
completely understood, but some researchers are convinced 
that these historically low levels of omega-3 (or, conversely, 
historically high levels of omega-6) bear responsibility for 128 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
many of the chronic diseases associated with the Western diet, 
including heart disease and diabetes. Population studies sug­
gest that omega-3 levels in the diet are strongly correlated with 
rates of heart disease, stroke, and mortality from all causes.* 
For example, the Japanese, who consume large amounts of 
omega-3s (most of it in fish), have markedly low rates of car­
diovascular disease in spite of their high rates of smoking and 
high blood pressure. Americans consume only a third as much 
omega-3 s as the Japanese and have nearly four times the rate of 
death from heart disease. But there is more than epidemiology 
to link omega-3 levels and heart disease: Clinical studies have 
found that increasing the omega-3s in one's diet may reduce 
the chances of heart attack by a third. 1" 
What biological mechanism could explain these findings? 
A couple of theories have emerged. Omega-3 s are present in 
high concentrations in heart tissue where they seem to play a 
role in regulating heart rhythm and preventing fatal arrhyth­
mias. Omega-3 s also dampen the inflammation response, 
which omega-6s tend to excite. Inflammation is now believed 
to play an important role in cardiovascular disease as well as in 
a range of other disorders, including rheumatoid arthritis and 
*Joseph Hibbeln, et al., "Healthy Intakes of n-3 and n-6 Fatty Acids: 
Estimations Considering Worldwide Diversity," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 
2006; 83 (suppl): 1483S-93S. 
tM. L. Daviglus, "Fish Consumption and the 30-Year Risk of Myocardial 
Infarction," New England Journal of Medicine, 1997; 336: 1046-53. K.W Lee and 
G.Y. Lip, "The Role of Omega-3 Fatty Acids in the Secondary Prevention 
of Cardiovascular Disease," QJM:An International Journal of Medicine, 2003 July; 
96(7):465-80. THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW « 129 
Alzheimer's. Omega-6s supply the building blocks for a class of 
pro-inflammatory messenger chemicals involved in the body's 
rapid-response reaction to a range of problems. One of these 
compounds is thromboxane, which encourages blood platelets 
to aggregate into clots. In contrast, omega-3s slow the clotting 
response, which is probably why populations with particularly 
high levels of omega-3s, such as the Inuit, are prone to bleed­
ing. (If there is a danger to consuming too much omega-3, 
bleeding is probably it.) 
The hypothesis that omega-3 might protect against heart 
disease was inspired by studies of Greenland Eskimos, in whom 
omega-3 consumption is high and heart disease rare. Eskimos 
eating their traditional marine-based diet also don't seem to 
get diabetes, and some researchers believe it is the omega-3s 
that protect them. Adding omega-3s to the diet of rats has been 
shown to protect them against insulin resistance. (The same ef­
fect has not been duplicated in humans, however.) The theory 
is that omega-3s increase the permeability of the cell's mem­
branes and its rate of metabolism. (Hummingbirds have tons of 
omega-3s in their cell membranes; big mammals much less.) A 
cell with a rapid metabolism and permeable membrane should 
respond particularly well to insulin, absorbing more glucose 
from the blood to meet its higher energy requirements. That 
same mechanism suggests that diets high in omega-3 s might 
protect against obesity as well. 
So why is it, as Susan Airport writes, that "populations, 
when given the choice, will naturally drift toward foods with 
lesser amounts of omega-3s"? Because a faster metabolism 
increases the need for food and therefore the possibility of 130 *>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
hunger, she suggests, which is a much less agreeable condi­
tion than being overweight. This might help explain why so 
many groups have adopted Western diets as soon as they get 
the chance. 
It should be said that researchers working on omega-3 s can 
sound a bit like Dr. Casaubon in Middlemarch, hard at work on 
his "Key to all Mythologies." Likewise, omega-3 researchers 
seem to be in possession of a Theory of Everything, including 
happiness. The same population studies that have correlated 
omega-3 deficiency to cardiovascular disease have also found 
strong correlations between falling levels of omega-3 in the 
diet and rising rates of depression, suicide, and even homi­
cide. Some researchers implicate omega-3 deficiency in learn­
ing disabilities such as attention déficit disorder as well. That 
omega-3 s play an important role in mental function has been 
recognized since the 1980s, when it was found that babies 
fed on infant formula supplemented with omega-3 s scored 
significantly higher on tests of both mental development and 
visual acuity than babies receiving formula supplemented only 
with omega-6. 
Could it be that the problem with the Western diet is a 
gross deficiency in this essential nutrient? A growing number 
of researchers have concluded that it is, and they voice frus­
tration that official nutritional advice has been slow to recog­
nize the problem. To do so, of course, would mean conceding 
the error of past nutritional advice demonizing fats in general 
and promoting the switch to seed oils high in omega-6. But 
it seems likely that sooner or later the government will estab-THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW *>> 131 
lish minimum daily requirements for omega-3 (several other 
governments already have) and, perhaps in time, doctors will 
routinely test us for omega-3 levels the way they already do 
for cholesterol. 
Though maybe they should be testing for omega-6 levels as 
well, because it's possible that is the greater problem. Omega-
6s exist in a kind of zero-sum relationship with omega-3s, 
counteracting most of the positive effects of omega-3 through­
out the body. Merely adding omega-3 s to the diet—by taking 
supplements, say—may not do much good unless we also re­
duce the high levels of omega-6s that have entered the Western 
diet with the advent of processed foods, seed oils, and foods 
from animals raised on grain. Nine percent of the calories in 
the American diet today come from a single omega-6 fatty 
acid: linoleic acid, most of it from soybean oil. Some nutri­
tion experts think that this is fine: Omega-6s, after all, are es­
sential fatty acids too, and their rise to dietary prominence 
has pushed out saturated fats, usually thought to be a positive 
development. But others strongly disagree, contending that the 
unprecedented proportion of omega-6s in the Western diet is 
contributing to the full range of disorders involving inflam­
mation. Joseph Hibbeln, the researcher at the National Insti­
tutes of Health who conducted population studies correlating 
omega-3 consumption with everything from stroke to suicide, 
says that the billions we spend on antiinflammatory drugs such 
as aspirin, ibuprofen, and acetaminophen is money spent to 
undo the effects of too much omega-6 in the diet. He writes, 
"The increases in world [omega-6] consumption over the past 132 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
century may be considered a very large uncontrolled experi­
ment that may have contributed to increased societal burdens 
of aggression, depression, and cardiovascular mortality."* 
Of all the changes to our food system that go under the head­
ing "The Western Diet," the shift from a food chain with green 
plants at its base to one based on seeds may be the most far 
reaching of all. Nutritional scientists focus on different nutri­
ents—whether the problem with modern diets is too many re­
fined carbohydrates, not enough good fats, too many bad fats, 
or a deficiency of any number of micronutrients or too many 
total calories. But at the root of all these biochemical changes 
is a single ecological change. For the shift from leaves to seeds 
affects much more than the levels of omega-3 and omega-
6 in the body. It also helps account for the flood of refined 
carbohydrates in the modern diet and the drought of so many 
micronutrients and the surfeit of total calories. From leaves to seeds: 
It's almost, if not quite, a Theory of Everything. 
5) From Food Culture to Food Science 
The last important change wrought by the Western diet is not, 
strictly speaking, ecological, at least not in any narrow sense 
*Joseph Hibbeln, et al., "Healthy Intakes of n-3 and n-6 Fatty Acids: 
Estimations Considering Worldwide Diversity," American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 
2006; 83 (suppl): 1483S-93S. THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW <» 133 
of the word. But the industrialization of our food that we call 
the Western diet is systematically and deliberately undermining 
traditional food cultures everywhere. This may be as destruc­
tive of our health as any nutritional deficiency. 
Before the modern food era—and before the rise of nutri-
tionism—people relied for guidance about what to eat on their 
national or ethnic or regional cultures. We think of culture as 
a set of beliefs and practices to help mediate our relationship 
to other people, but of course culture—at least before the 
rise of modern science—has also played a critical role in help­
ing to mediate people's relationship to nature. Eating being 
one of the most important manifestations of that relationship, 
cultures have had a great deal to say about what and how and 
why and when and how much we should eat. Of course when 
it comes to food, culture is another word for mom, the figure 
who typically passes on the food ways of the group—food 
ways that endured, by the way, only because they tended to 
keep people healthy. 
The sheer novelty and glamour of the Western diet, with 
its seventeen thousand new food products every year and the 
marketing power—thirty-two billion dollars a year—used to 
sell us those products, has overwhelmed the force of tradition 
and left us where we now find ourselves: relying on science 
and journalism and government and marketing to help us de­
cide what to eat. Nutritionism, which arose to help us better 
deal with the problems of the Western diet, has largely been 
co-opted by it: used by the industry to sell more nutrition­
ally "enhanced" processed food and to undermine further the 
authority of traditional food cultures that stand in the way of 134 «i IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
fast food. Industry greatly amplifies the claims of nutritional 
science through its advertising and, through its sponsorship of 
self-serving nutritional research, corrupts it.* The predictable 
result is the general cacophony of nutritional information ring­
ing in our ears and the widespread confusion that has come to 
surround this most fundamental of creaturely activities: find­
ing something good to eat. 
You would not have bought this book and read this far into 
it if your food culture was intact and healthy. And while it is 
true that most of us unthinkingly place the authority of science 
above culture in all matters having to do with our health, that 
prejudice should at least be examined. The question we need 
to ask is, Are we better off with these new authorities telling us 
how to eat than we were with the traditional authorities they 
supplanted? The answer by now should be clear. 
It might be argued that at this point we should simply ac­
cept that fast food is our food culture and get on with it. Over 
time, people will get used to eating this way, and our health 
will improve as we gradually adjust to the new food environ­
ment. Also, as nutritional science improves, we should be able 
to ameliorate the worst effects of this diet. Already food scien­
tists are figuring out ways to microencapsulate omega-3 s and 
•Several studies have found that when industry funds nutrition research, the 
conclusions are more likely to produce findings favorable to that industry's 
products. One such previously cited study, published by the Public Library of 
Science, is "Relationships Between Funding Source and Conclusion Among 
Nutrition-Related Scientific Articles," by David S. Ludwig, et al. See also 
Marion Nestles Food Politics:How the Food Industry Influences Nutrition and Health. 
Revised edition. (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007). THE INDUSTRIALIZATION OF EATING: WHAT WE DO KNOW Oi 135 
bake them into our vitamin-fortified bread. But I'm not sure 
we should put our faith in food science, which so far has not 
served us very well, or in evolution, either. 
There are a couple of problems with trying simply to get 
used to the Western diet. You could argue that, compared to 
the Aborigines, say, or Inuit, we are getting used to it—most of 
us don't get quite as fat or diabetic as they do. But our "adjust­
ment" looks much less plausible when you consider that, as 
mentioned, fully a quarter of all Americans suffer from meta­
bolic syndrome, two thirds of us are overweight or obese, and 
diet-related diseases are already killing the majority of us. The 
concept of a changing food environment is not just a metaphor; 
nor is the idea of adapting to it. In order for natural selection 
to help us adapt to the Western diet, we'd have to be prepared 
to let those whom it sickens die. Also, many of the chronic 
diseases caused by the Western diet come late in life, after the 
childbearing years, a period of our lives in which natural selec­
tion takes no interest. Thus genes predisposing people to these 
conditions get passed on rather than weeded out. 
So we turn for salvation to the health care industry. Medi­
cine is learning how to keep alive the people whom the West­
ern diet is making sick. Doctors have gotten really good at 
keeping people with heart disease alive, and now they're 
hard at work on obesity and diabetes. Much more so than the 
human body, capitalism is marvelously adaptive, able to turn 
the problems it creates into new business opportunities: diet 
pills, heart bypass operations, insulin pumps, bariatric surgery. 
But though fast food may be good business for the health care 
industry, the cost to society—an estimated $250 billion a year 136 «i IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
in diet-related health care costs and rising rapidly—cannot 
be sustained indefinitely. An American born in 2000 has a 1 
in 3 chance of developing diabetes in his lifetime; the risk 
is even greater for a Hispanic American or African American. 
A diagnosis of diabetes subtracts roughly twelve years from 
one's life and living with the condition incurs medical costs of 
$13,000 a year (compared with $2,500 for someone without 
diabetes). 
This is a global pandemic in the making, but a most unusual 
one, because it involves no virus or bacteria, no microbe of any 
kind—just a way of eating. It remains to be seen whether we'll 
respond by changing our diet or our culture and economy. 
Although an estimated 80 percent of cases of type 2 diabetes 
could be prevented by a change of diet and exercise, it looks 
like the smart money is instead on the creation of a vast new 
diabetes industry. The mainstream media is full of advertise­
ments for new gadgets and drugs for diabetics, and the health 
care industry is gearing up to meet the surging demand for 
heart bypass operations (80 percent of diabetics will suffer 
from heart disease), dialysis, and kidney transplantation. At the 
supermarket checkout you can thumb copies of a new lifestyle 
magazine, Diabetic Living. Diabetes is well on its way to becom­
ing normalized in the West—recognized as a whole new de­
mographic and so a major marketing opportunity. Apparently 
it is easier, or at least a lot more profitable, to change a disease 
of civilization into a lifestyle than it is to change the way that 
civilization eats. Ill 
GETTING OVER 
NUTRITIONISM ONE « ESCAPE FROM THE 
WESTERN DIET 
The undertow of nutritionism is powerful, and more than 
once over the past few pages I've felt myself being dragged 
back under. You've no doubt noticed that much of the nutrition 
science I've presented here qualifies as reductionist science, fo­
cusing as it does on individual nutrients (such as certain fats or 
carbohydrates or antioxidants) rather than on whole foods 
or dietary patterns. Guilty. But using this sort of science to try to 
figure out what's wrong with the Western diet is probably un­
avoidable. However imperfect, it's the sharpest experimental and 
explanatory tool we have. It also satisfies our hunger for a simple, 
one-nutrient explanation. Yet it's one thing to entertain such ex­
planations and quite another to mistake them for the whole truth 
or to let any one of them dictate the way you eat. 
You've probably also noticed that many of the scientific 
theories put forward to account for exactly what in the West­
ern diet is responsible for Western diseases conflict with one 
another. The lipid hypothesis cannot be reconciled with the 
carbohydrate hypothesis, and the theory that a deficiency of 140 0> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
omega-3 fatty acids (call it the neolipid hypothesis) is chiefly to 
blame for chronic illness is at odds with the theory that refined 
carbohydrates are the key. And while everyone can agree that 
the flood of refined carbohydrates has pushed important mi-
cronutrients out of the modern diet, the scientists who blame 
our health problems on deficiencies of these micronutrients 
are not the same scientists who see a sugar-soaked diet lead­
ing to metabolic syndrome and from there to diabetes, heart 
disease, and cancer. It is only natural for scientists no less than 
the rest of us to gravitate toward a single, all-encompassing 
explanation. That is probably why you now find some of the 
most fervent critics of the lipid hypothesis embracing the car­
bohydrate hypothesis with the same absolutist zeal that they 
once condemned in the Fat Boys. In the course of my own 
research into these theories, I have been specifically warned by 
scientists allied with the carbohydrate camp not to "fall under 
the spell of the omega-3 cult." Cult? There is a lot more religion 
in science than you might expect. 
So here we find ourselves once again, lost at sea amid the 
crosscurrents of conflicting science. 
Or do we? 
Because it turns out we don't need to declare our allegiance 
to any one of these schools of thought in order to figure out 
how best to eat. In the end, they are only theories, scientific 
explanations for an empirical phenomenon that is not itself in 
doubt: People eating a Western diet are prone to a complex of 
chronic diseases that seldom strike people eating more tradi­
tional diets. Scientists can argue all they want about the bio­
logical mechanisms behind this phenomenon, but whichever ESCAPE FROM THE WESTERN DIET « 141 
it is, the solution to the problem would appear to remain very 
much the same: Stop eating a Western diet. 
In truth the chief value of any and all theories of nutrition, 
apart from satisfying our curiosity about how things work, is 
not to the eater so much as it is to the food industry and the 
medical community. The food industry needs theories so it can 
better redesign specific processed foods; a new theory means a 
new line of products, allowing the industry to go on tweaking 
the Western diet instead of making any more radical change to 
its business model. For the industry it's obviously preferable to 
have a scientific rationale for further processing foods—whether 
by lowering the fat or carbs or by boosting omega-3 s or for­
tifying them with antioxidants and probiotics—than to enter­
tain seriously the proposition that processed foods of any kind 
are a big part of the problem. 
For the medical community too scientific theories about 
diet nourish business as usual. New theories beget new drugs 
to treat diabetes, high blood pressure, and cholesterol; new 
treatments and procedures to ameliorate chronic diseases; and 
new diets organized around each new theory's elevation of one 
class of nutrient and demotion of another. Much lip service 
is paid to the importance of prevention, but the health care 
industry, being an industry, stands to profit more handsomely 
from new drugs and procedures to treat chronic diseases than 
it does from a wholesale change in the way people eat. Cyni­
cal? Perhaps. You could argue that the medical community's 
willingness to treat the broad contours of the Western diet as a 
given is a reflection of its realism rather than its greed. "People 
don't want to go there," as Walter Willett responded to the critic 142 O» IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
who asked him why the Nurses' Health Study didn't study the 
benefits of more alternative diets. Still, medicalizing the whole 
problem of the Western diet instead of working to overturn it 
(whether at the level of the patient or politics) is exactly what 
you'd expect from a health care community that is sympathetic 
to nutritionism as a matter of temperament, philosophy, and 
economics. You would not expect such a medical community 
to be sensitive to the cultural or ecological dimensions of the 
food problem—and it isn't. We'll know this has changed when 
doctors kick the fast-food franchises out of the hospitals. 
So what would a more ecological or cultural approach to 
the food problem counsel us? How might we plot our escape 
from nutritionism and, in turn, from the most harmful ef­
fects of the Western diet? To Denis Burkitt, the English doctor 
stationed in Africa during World War II who gave the West­
ern diseases their name, the answer seemed straightforward, 
if daunting. "The only way we're going to reduce disease," he 
said, "is to go backwards to the diet and lifestyle of our an­
cestors." This sounds uncomfortably like the approach of the 
diabetic Aborigines who went back to the bush to heal them­
selves. But I don't think this is what Burkitt had in mind; even 
if it was, it is not a very attractive or practical strategy for most 
of us. No, the challenge we face today is figuring out how 
to escape the worst elements of the Western diet and lifestyle 
without going back to the bush. 
In theory, nothing could be simpler: To escape the Western 
diet and the ideology of nutritionism, we have only to stop 
eating and thinking that way. But this is harder to do in prac­
tice, given the treacherous food environment we now inhabit ESCAPE FROM THE WESTERN DIET & 143 
and the loss of cultural tools to guide us through it. Take the 
question of whole versus processed foods, presumably one of 
the simpler distinctions between modern industrial foods and 
older kinds. Gyorgy Scrinis, who coined the term "nutrition­
ism," suggests that the most important fact about any food is 
not its nutrient content but its degree of processing. He writes 
that "whole foods and industrial foods are the only two food 
groups I'd consider including in any useful food 'pyramid.' " In 
other words, instead of worrying about nutrients, we should 
simply avoid any food that has been processed to such an ex­
tent that it is more the product of industry than of nature. 
This sounds like a sensible rule of thumb until you realize 
that industrial processes have by now invaded many whole 
foods too. Is a steak from a feedlot steer that consumed a diet 
of corn, various industrial waste products, antibiotics, and hor­
mones still a "whole food"? I'm not so sure.The steer has itself 
been raised on a Western diet, and that diet has rendered its 
meat substantially different—in the type and amount of fat in 
it as well as its vitamin content—from the beef our ancestors 
ate. The steer's industrial upbringing has also rendered its meat 
so cheap that we're likely to eat more of it more often than our 
ancestors ever would have. This suggests yet another sense in 
which this beef has become an industrial food: It is designed 
to be eaten industrially too—as fast food. 
So plotting our way out of the Western diet is not going to 
be simple. Yet I am convinced that it can be done, and in the 
course of my research, I have collected and developed some 
straightforward (and distinctly unscientific) rules of thumb, or 
personal eating policies, that might at least point us in the right 144 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
direction. They don't say much about specific foods—about 
what sort of oil to cook with or whether you should eat meat. 
They don't have much to say about nutrients or calories, either, 
though eating according to these rules will perforce change 
the balance of nutrients and amount of calories in your diet. 
I'm not interested in dictating anyone's menu, but rather in 
developing what I think of as eating algorithms—mental pro­
grams that, if you run them when you're shopping for food or 
deciding on a meal, will produce a great many different din­
ners, all of them "healthy" in the broadest sense of that word. 
And our sense of that word stands in need of some broad­
ening. When most of us think about food and health, we think 
in fairly narrow nutritionist terms—about our personal physi­
cal health and how the ingestion of this particular nutrient or 
rejection of that affects it. But I no longer think it's possible to 
separate our bodily health from the health of the environment 
from which we eat or the environment in which we eat or, 
for that matter, from the health of our general oudook about 
food (and health). If my explorations of the food chain have 
taught me anything, it's that it is a food chain, and all the links 
in it are in fact linked: the health of the soil to the health of the 
plants and animals we eat to the health of the food culture in 
which we eat them to the health of the eater, in body as well as 
mind. So you will find rules here concerning not only what to 
eat but also how to eat it as well as how that food is produced. 
Food consists not just in piles of chemicals; it also comprises a 
set of social and ecological relationships, reaching back to the 
land and outward to other people. Some of these rules may ESCAPE FROM THE WESTERN DIET « 145 
strike you as having nothing whatever to do with health; in 
fact they do. 
Many of the policies will also strike you as involving more 
work—and in fact they do. If there is one important sense in 
which we do need to heed Burkitt's call to "go backwards" 
or follow the Aborigines back into the bush, it is this one: 
In order to eat well we need to invest more time, effort, and 
resources in providing for our sustenance, to dust off a word, 
than most of us do today. A hallmark of the Western diet is 
food that is fast, cheap, and easy. Americans spend less than 10 
percent of their income on food; they also spend less than a 
half hour a day preparing meals and little more than an hour 
enjoying them.* For most people for most of history, gathering 
and preparing food has been an occupation at the very heart 
of daily life. Traditionally people have allocated a far greater 
proportion of their income to food—as they still do in several 
of the countries where people eat better than we do and as a 
consequence are healthier than we are.1" Here, then, is one way 
in which we would do well to go a little native: backward, or 
*David M. Cutler, et al., "Why Have Americans Become More Obese?," Journal 
of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 17, No. 3 (Summer, 2003), pp. 93-118. In 1995 
Americans spent twenty-seven minutes preparing meals and four minutes 
cleaning up after them; in 1965 the figure was forty-four minutes of 
preparation and twenty-one minutes of cleanup. Total time spent eating has 
dropped from sixty-nine minutes to sixty-five, all of which suggests a trend 
toward prepackaged meals. 
"•"Compared to the 9.9 percent of their income Americans spend on food, the 
Italians spend 14.9 percent, the French 14.9 percent, and the Spanish 17.1 
percent. 146 <a IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
perhaps it is forward, to a time and place where the gathering 
and preparing and enjoying of food were closer to the center 
of a well-lived life. 
This book started out with seven words and three rules—"Eat 
food. Not too much. Mostly plants"—that I now need to unpack, pro­
viding some elaboration and refinement in the form of more 
specific guidelines, injunctions, subclauses, and the like. Each 
of these three main rules can serve as category headings for 
a set of personal policies to guide us in our eating choices 
without too much trouble or thought. The idea behind having 
a simple policy like "avoid foods that make health claims" is to 
make the process simpler and more pleasurable than trying to 
eat by the numbers and nutrients, as nutritionism encourages 
us to do. 
So under "Eat Food," I propose some practical ways to 
separate, and defend, real food from the cascade of foodlike 
products that now surround and confound us, especially in 
the supermarket. Many of the tips under this rubric concern 
shopping and take the form of filters that should help keep out 
the sort of products you want to avoid. Under "Mostly Plants," 
I'll dwell more specifically, and affirmatively, on the best types 
of foods (not nutrients) to eat. Lest you worry, there is, as the 
adverb suggests, more to this list than fruits and vegetables. 
Last, under "Not Too Much," the focus shifts from the foods 
themselves to the question of how to eat them—the manners, 
mores, and habits that go into creating a healthy, and pleasing, 
culture of eating. TWO « EAT FOOD: FOOD 
DEFINED 
The first time I heard the advice to "just eat food" it was in 
a speech by Joan Gussow, and it completely baffled me. 
Of course you should eat food—what else is there to eat? But 
Gussow, who grows much of her own food on a flood-prone 
finger of land jutting into the Hudson River, refuses to dignify 
most of the products for sale in the supermarket with that title. 
"In the thirty-four years I've been in the field of nutrition," she 
said in the same speech, "I have watched real food disappear 
from large areas of the supermarket and from much of the rest 
of the eating world." Taking food's place on the shelves has 
been an unending stream of foodlike substitutes, some seven­
teen thousand new ones every year—"products constructed 
largely around commerce and hope, supported by frighten-
ingly little actual knowledge." Ordinary food is still out there, 
however, still being grown and even occasionally sold in the 
supermarket, and this ordinary food is what we should eat. 
But given our current state of confusion and given the 
thousands of products calling themselves food, this is more 
easily said than done. So consider these related rules of thumb. 
Each proposes a different sort of map to the contemporary 
food landscape, but all should take you to more or less the 
same place. 148 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
& DON'T EAT ANYTHING YOUR GREAT GRAND­
MOTHER WOULDN'T RECOGNIZE AS FOOD. Why 
your great grandmother? Because at this point your mother 
and possibly even your grandmother is as confused as the rest 
of us; to be safe we need to go back at least a couple genera­
tions, to a time before the advent of most modern foods. So 
depending on your age (and your grandmother), you 
may need to go back to your great- or even great-great grand­
mother. Some nutritionists recommend going back even fur­
ther. John Yudkin, a British nutritionist whose early alarms 
about the dangers of refined carbohydrates were overlooked 
in the 1960s and 1970s, once advised, "Just don't eat anything 
your Neolithic ancestors wouldn't have recognized and you'll 
be ok." 
What would shopping this way mean in the supermarket? 
Well, imagine your great grandmother at your side as you 
roll down the aisles. You're standing together in front of the 
dairy case. She picks up a package of Go-Gurt Portable Yogurt 
tubes—and has no idea what this could possibly be. Is it a food 
or a toothpaste? And how, exactly, do you introduce it into 
your body? You could tell her it's just yogurt in a squirtable 
form, yet if she read the ingredients label she would have every 
reason to doubt that that was in fact the case. Sure, there's some 
yogurt in there, but there are also a dozen other things that 
aren't remotely yogurtlike, ingredients she would probably fail 
to recognize as foods of any kind, including high-fructose corn 
syrup, modified corn starch, kosher gelatin, carrageenan, tri-
calcium phosphate, natural and artificial flavors, vitamins, and 
so forth. (And there's a whole other list of ingredients for the EAT FOOD: FOOD DEFINED <* 149 
"berry bubblegum bash" flavoring, containing everything but 
berries or bubblegum.) How did yogurt, which in your great 
grandmother's day consisted simply of milk inoculated with a 
bacterial culture, ever get to be so complicated? Is a product 
like Go-Gurt Portable Yogurt still a whole food? A food of any 
kind? Or is it just a food product? 
There are in fact hundreds of foodish products in the su­
permarket that your ancestors simply wouldn't recognize as 
food: breakfast cereal bars transected by bright white veins 
representing, but in reality having nothing to do with, milk; 
"protein waters" and "nondairy creamer"; cheeselike food­
stuffs equally innocent of any bovine contribution; cakelike 
cylinders (with creamlike fillings) called Twinkies that never 
grow stale. Don't eat anything incapable of rotting is another personal 
policy you might consider adopting. 
There are many reasons to avoid eating such complicated 
food products beyond the various chemical additives and 
corn and soy derivatives they contain. One of the problems 
with the products of food science is that, as Joan Gussow has 
pointed out, they lie to your body; their artificial colors and 
flavors and synthetic sweeteners and novel fats confound the 
senses we rely on to assess new foods and prepare our bodies 
to deal with them. Foods that lie leave us with little choice 
but to eat by the numbers, consulting labels rather than our 
senses. 
It's true that foods have long been processed in order to 
preserve them, as when we pickle or ferment or smoke, but 
industrial processing aims to do much more than extend shelf 
life. Today foods are processed in ways specifically designed to ISO IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
sell us more food by pushing our evolutionary buttons—our 
inborn preferences for sweetness and fat and salt. These quali­
ties are difficult to find in nature but cheap and easy for the 
food scientist to deploy, with the result that processing induces 
us to consume much more of these ecological rarities than is 
good for us. "Tastes great, less filling!" could be the motto for 
most processed foods, which are far more energy dense than 
most whole foods: They contain much less water, fiber, and 
micronutrients, and generally much more sugar and fat, mak­
ing them at the same time, to coin a marketing slogan, "More 
fattening, less nutritious!" 
The great grandma rule will help keep many of these prod­
ucts out of your cart. But not all of them. Because thanks to the 
FDA's willingness, post-1973, to let food makers freely alter 
the identity of "traditional foods that everyone knows" with­
out having to call them imitations, your great grandmother 
could easily be fooled into thinking that that loaf of bread or 
wedge of cheese is in fact a loaf of bread or a wedge of cheese. 
This is why we need a slightly more detailed personal policy 
to capture these imitation foods; to wit: 
& AVOID FOOD PRODUCTS CONTAINING INGRE­
DIENTS THAT ARE A) UNFAMILIAR, B) UNPRO­
NOUNCEABLE, C) MORE THAN FIVE IN NUMBER, 
OR THAT INCLUDE D) H I G H - F R U C T O S E CORN 
S Y RU P. None of these characteristics, not even the last one, 
is necessarily harmful in and of itself, but all of them are reli­
able markers for foods that have been highly processed to the EAT FOOD: FOOD DEFINED « 1S1 
point where they may no longer be what they purport to be. 
They have crossed over from foods to food products. 
Consider a loaf of bread, one of the "traditional foods that 
everyone knows" specifically singled out for protection in 
the 1938 imitation rule. As your grandmother could tell you, 
bread is traditionally made using a remarkably small number 
of familiar ingredients: flour, yeast, water, and a pinch of salt 
will do it. But industrial bread—even industrial whole-grain 
bread—has become a far more complicated product of modern 
food science (not to mention commerce and hope). Here's the 
complete ingredients list for Sara Lee's Soft & Smooth Whole 
Grain White Bread. (Wait a minute—isn't "Whole Grain White 
Bread" a contradiction in terms? Evidently not any more.) 
Enriched bleached flour [wheat flour, malted barley 
flour, niacin, iron, thiamin mononitrate (vitamin 
Bj), riboflavin (vitamin B2), folic acid], water, 
whole grains [whole wheat flour, brown rice flour 
(rice flour, rice bran)], high fructose corn syrup 
[hello!], whey, wheat gluten, yeast, cellulose. 
Contains 2% or less of each of the following: 
honey, calcium sulfate, vegetable oil (soybean 
and/or cottonseed oils), salt, butter (cream, salt), 
dough conditioners (may contain one or more 
of the following: mono- and diglycerides, 
ethoxylated mono- and diglycerides, ascorbic acid, 
enzymes, azodicarbonamide), guar gum, calcium 
propionate (preservative), distilled vinegar, yeast 152 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
nutrients (monocalcium phosphate, calcium sulfate, 
ammonium sulfate), corn starch, natural flavor, beta-
carotene (color), vitamin D3, soy lecithin, soy flour. 
There are many things you could say about this intricate 
loaf of "bread," but note first that even if it managed to slip 
by your great grandmother (because it is a loaf of bread, or at 
least is called one and strongly resembles one), the product 
fails every test proposed under rule number two: It's got un­
familiar ingredients (monoglycerides I've heard of before, but 
ethoxylated monoglycerides?); unpronounceable ingredients 
(try "azodicarbonamide"); it exceeds the maximum of five in­
gredients (by roughly thirty-six) ; and it contains high-fructose 
corn syrup. Sorry, Sara Lee, but your Soft & Smooth Whole 
Grain White Bread is not food and if not for the indulgence of 
the FDA could not even be labeled "bread." 
Sara Lee's Soft & Smooth Whole Grain White Bread could 
serve as a monument to the age of nutritionism. It embodies 
the latest nutritional wisdom from science and government 
(which in its most recent food pyramid recommends that 
at least half our consumption of grain come from whole 
grains) but leavens that wisdom with the commercial recogni­
tion that American eaters (and American children in particu­
lar) have come to prefer their wheat highly refined—which 
is to say, cottony soft, snowy white, and exceptionally sweet 
on the tongue. In its marketing materials, Sara Lee treats this 
clash of interests as some sort of Gordian knot—it speaks 
in terms of an ambitious quest to build a "no compromise" EAT FOOD: FOOD DEFINED 153 
loaf—which only the most sophisticated food science could 
possibly cut. 
And so it has, with the invention of whole-grain white 
bread. Because the small percentage of whole grains in the 
bread would render it that much less sweet than, say, all-white 
Wonder Bread—which scarcely waits to be chewed before 
transforming itself into glucose—the food scientists have added 
high-fructose corn syrup and honey to to make up the differ­
ence; to overcome the problematic heft and toothsomeness of 
a real whole grain bread, they've deployed "dough condition­
ers," including guar gum and the aforementioned azodicar-
bonamide, to simulate the texture of supermarket white bread. 
By incorporating certain varieties of albino wheat, they've 
managed to maintain that deathly but apparently appealing 
Wonder Bread pallor. 
Who would have thought Wonder Bread would ever be­
come an ideal of aesthetic and gustatory perfection to which 
bakers would actually aspire—Sara Lee's Mona Lisa? 
Very often food science's efforts to make traditional foods 
more nutritious make them much more complicated, but not 
necessarily any better for you. To make dairy products low fat, 
it's not enough to remove the fat. You then have to go to great 
lengths to preserve the body or creamy texture by working 
in all kinds of food additives. In the case of low-fat or skim 
milk, that usually means adding powdered milk. But powdered 
milk contains oxidized cholesterol, which scientists believe is 
much worse for your arteries than ordinary cholesterol, so 
food makers sometimes compensate by adding antioxidants, 154 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
further complicating what had been a simple one-ingredient 
whole food. Also, removing the fat makes it that much harder 
for your body to absorb the fat-soluble vitamins that are one 
of the reasons to drink milk in the first place. 
All this heroic and occasionally counterproductive food sci­
ence has been undertaken in the name of our health—so that 
Sara Lee can add to its plastic wrapper the magic words "good 
source of whole grain" or a food company can ballyhoo the 
even more magic words "low fat." Which brings us to a related 
food policy that may at first sound counterintuitive to a health-
conscious eater: 
^ AVOID FOOD PRODUCTS THAT MAKE HEALTH 
CLAIMS. For a food product to make health claims on its 
package it must first have a package, so right off the bat it's more 
likely to be a processed than a whole food. Generally speaking, 
it is only the big food companies that have the wherewithal to 
secure FDA-approved health claims for their products and then 
trumpet them to the world. Recently, however, some of the 
tonier fruits and nuts have begun boasting about their health-
enhancing properties, and there will surely be more as each 
crop council scrounges together the money to commission its 
own scientific study. Because all plants contain antioxidants, all 
these studies are guaranteed to find something on which to base 
a health oriented marketing campaign. 
But for the most part it is the products of food science that 
make the boldest health claims, and these are often founded on 
incomplete and often erroneous science—the dubious fruits of 
nutritionism. Don't forget that trans-fat-rich margarine, one EAT FOOD: FOOD DEFINED « 155 
of the first industrial foods to claim it was healthier than the 
traditional food it replaced, turned out to give people heart 
attacks. Since that debacle, the FDA, under tremendous pres­
sure from industry, has made it only easier for food companies 
to make increasingly doubtful health claims, such as the one 
Frito-Lay now puts on some of its chips—that eating them is 
somehow good for your heart. If you bother to read the health 
claims closely (as food marketers make sure consumers seldom 
do), you will find that there is often considerably less to them 
than meets the eye. 
Consider a recent "qualified" health claim approved by the 
FDA for (don't laugh) corn oil. ("Qualified" is a whole new 
category of health claim, introduced in 2002 at the behest of 
industry.) Corn oil, you may recall, is particularly high in the 
omega-6 fatty acids we're already consuming far too many of. 
Very limited and preliminary scientific evidence 
suggests that eating about one tablespoon ( 16 
grams) of corn oil daily may reduce the risk of heart 
disease due to the unsaturated fat content in corn oil. 
The tablespoon is a particularly rich touch, conjuring im­
ages of moms administering medicine, or perhaps cod-liver 
oil, to their children. But what the FDA gives with one hand, 
it takes away with the other. Here's the small-print "qualifica­
tion" of this already notably diffident health claim: 
[The] FDA concludes that there is little scientific 
evidence supporting this claim. 156 <>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
And then to make matters still more perplexing: 
To achieve this possible benefit, corn oil is to replace 
a similar amount of saturated fat and not increase 
the total number of calories you eat in a day. 
This little masterpiece of pseudoscientific bureaucratese 
was extracted from the FDA by the manufacturer of Mazola 
corn oil. It would appear that "qualified" is an official FDA 
euphemism for "all but meaningless." Though someone might 
have let the consumer in on this game: The FDA's own re­
search indicates that consumers have no idea what to make of 
qualified health claims (how would they?), and its rules allow 
companies to promote the claims pretty much any way they 
want—they can use really big type for the claim, for example, 
and then print the disclaimers in teeny-tiny type. No doubt we 
can look forward to a qualified health claim for high-fructose 
corn syrup, a tablespoon of which probably does contribute to 
your health—as long as it replaces a comparable amount of, 
say, poison in your diet and doesn't increase the total number 
of calories you eat in a day. 
When corn oil and chips and sugary breakfast cereals can 
all boast being good for your heart, health claims have become 
hopelessly corrupt. The American Heart Association currently 
bestows (for a fee) its heart-healthy seal of approval on Lucky 
Charms, Cocoa Puffs, and Trix cereals, Yoo-hoo lite chocolate 
drink, and Healthy Choice's Premium Caramel Swirl Ice Cream 
Sandwich—this at a time when scientists are coming to recog-EAT FOOD: FOOD DEFINED &> 157 
nize that dietary sugar probably plays a more important role in 
heart disease than dietary fat. Meanwhile, the genuinely heart-
healthy whole foods in the produce section, lacking the finan­
cial and political clout of the packaged goods a few aisles over, 
are mute. But don't take the silence of the yams as a sign that 
they have nothing valuable to say about health. 
Bogus health claims and food science have made super­
markets particularly treacherous places to shop for real food, 
which suggests two further rules: 
^ SHOP THE PERIPHERIES OF THE SUPERMARKET 
AND STAY OUT OF THE MIDDLE. Most supermarkets 
are laid out the same way: Processed food products dominate 
the center aisles of the store while the cases of ostensibly fresh 
food—dairy, produce, meat, and fish—line the walls. If you 
keep to the edges of the store you'll be that much more likely 
to wind up with real food in your shopping cart.The strategy is 
not foolproof, however, because things like high-fructose corn 
syrup have slipped into the dairy case under cover of Go-Gurt 
and such. So consider a more radical strategy: 
€h GET OUT OF THE SUPERMARKET WHENEVER 
POSSIBLE. You won't find any high-fructose corn syrup at the 
farmers' market. You also won't find any elaborately processed 
food products, any packages with long lists of unpronounce­
able ingredients or dubious health claims, nothing microwav-
able, and, perhaps best of all, no old food from far away. What 
you will find are fresh whole foods picked at the peak of their 1S8 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
taste and nutritional quality—precisely the kind your great 
grandmother, or even your Neolithic ancestors, would easily 
have recognized as food. 
Indeed, the surest way to escape the Western diet is simply 
to depart the realms it rules: the supermarket, the convenience 
store, and the fast-food outlet. It is hard to eat badly from 
the farmers' market, from a CSA box (community-supported 
agriculture, an increasingly popular scheme in which you 
subscribe to a farm and receive a weekly box of produce), or 
from your garden. The number of farmers' markets has more 
than doubled in the last ten years, to more than four thousand, 
making it one of the fastest-growing segments of the food 
marketplace. It is true that most farmers' markets operate only 
seasonally, and you won't find everything you need there. But 
buying as much as you can from the farmers' market, or di­
rectly from the farm when that's an option, is a simple act with 
a host of profound consequences for your health as well as for 
the health of the food chain you've now joined. 
When you eat from the farmers' market, you automatically 
eat food that is in season, which is usually when it is most nu­
tritious. Eating in season also tends to diversify your diet—be­
cause you can't buy strawberries or broccoli or potatoes twelve 
months of the year, you'll find yourself experimenting with 
other foods when they come into the market. The CSA box 
does an even better job of forcing you out of your dietary rut 
because you'll find things in your weekly allotment that you 
would never buy on your own. Whether it's a rutabaga or an 
unfamiliar winter squash, the CSA box's contents invariably 
send you to your cookbooks to figure out what in the world EAT FOOD: FOOD DEFINED <>> 159 
to do with them. Cooking is one of the most important health 
consequences of buying food from local farmers; for one thing, 
when you cook at home you seldom find yourself reaching for 
the ethoxylated diglycerides or high-fructose corn syrup. But 
more on cooking later. 
To shop at a farmers' market or sign up with a CSA is to join 
a short food chain and that has several implications for your 
health. Local produce is typically picked ripe and is fresher than 
supermarket produce, and for those reasons it should be tastier 
and more nutritious. As for supermarket organic produce, it 
too is likely to have come from far away—from the industrial 
organic farms of California or, increasingly, China.* And while 
it's true that the organic label guarantees that no synthetic pes­
ticides or fertilizers have been used to produce the food, many, 
if not most, of the small farms that supply farmers' markets are 
organic in everything but name.To survive in the farmers' mar­
ket or CSA economy, a farm will need to be highly diversified, 
and a diversified farm usually has little need for pesticides; it's 
the big monocultures that can't survive without them.1" 
If you're concerned about chemicals in your produce, you 
can simply ask the farmer at the market how he or she deals 
with pests and fertility and begin the sort of conversation be-
*One recent study found that the average item of organic produce in the 
supermarket had actually traveled farther from the farm than the average item 
of conventional produce. 
^Wendell Berry put the problem of monoculture with admirable brevity 
and clarity in his essay "The Pleasures of Eating": "But as scale increases, 
diversity declines; as diversity declines, so does health; as health declines, the 
dependence on drugs and chemicals necessarily increases." 160 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
tween producers and consumers that, in the end, is the best 
guarantee of quality in your food. So many of the problems of 
the industrial food chain stem from its length and complex­
ity. A wall of ignorance intervenes between consumers and 
producers, and that wall fosters a certain carelessness on both 
sides. Farmers can lose sight of the fact that they're growing 
food for actual eaters rather than for middlemen, and con­
sumers can easily forget that growing good food takes care 
and hard work. In a long food chain, the story and identity 
of the food (Who grew it? Where and how was it grown?) 
disappear into the undifferentiated stream of commodities, so 
that the only information communicated between consum­
ers and producers is a price. In a short food chain, eaters can 
make their needs and desires known to the farmer, and farm­
ers can impress on eaters the distinctions between ordinary 
and exceptional food, and the many reasons why exceptional 
food is worth what it costs. Food reclaims its story, and some 
of its nobility, when the person who grew it hands it to you. 
So here's a subclause to the get-out-of-the-supermarket rule: 
Shake the hand that feeds you. 
As soon as you do, accountability becomes once again a 
matter of relationships instead of regulation or labeling or legal 
liability. Food safety didn't become a national or global prob­
lem until the industrialization of the food chain attenuated the 
relationships between food producers and eaters. That was the 
story Upton Sinclair told about the Beef Trust in 1906, and it's 
the story unfolding in China today, where the rapid industrial­
ization of the food system is leading to alarming breakdowns MOSTLY PLANTS: WHAT TO EAT <»> 161 
in food safety and integrity. Regulation is an imperfect sub­
stitute for the accountability, and trust, built into a market in 
which food producers meet the gaze of eaters and vice versa. 
Only when we participate in a short food chain are we re­
minded every week that we are indeed part of a food chain 
and dependent for our health on its peoples and soils and in­
tegrity—on its health. 
"Eating is an agricultural act," Wendell Berry famously 
wrote, by which he meant that we are not just passive consum­
ers of food but cocreators of the systems that feed us. Depend­
ing on how we spend them, our food dollars can either go to 
support a food industry devoted to quantity and convenience 
and "value" or they can nourish a food chain organized around 
values—values like quality and health. Yes, shopping this way 
takes more money and effort, but as soon you begin to treat 
that expenditure not just as shopping but also as a kind of 
vote—a vote for health in the largest sense—food no longer 
seems like the smartest place to economize. 
THREE « MOSTLY PLANTS: 
WHAT TO EAT 
If you can manage to just eat food most of the time, whatever 
that food is, you'll probably be okay. One lesson that can 
be drawn from the striking diversity of traditional diets that 162 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
people have lived on around the world is that it is possible 
to nourish ourselves from an astonishing range of different 
foods, so long as they are foods. There have been, and can be, 
healthy high-fat and healthy low-fat diets, so long as they're 
built around whole foods rather than highly processed food 
products. Yet there are some whole foods that are better than 
others, and some ways of producing them and then combin­
ing them in meals that are worth attending to. So this section 
proposes a handful of personal policies regarding what to eat, 
above and beyond "food." 
EAT MOSTLY PLANTS, ESPECIALLY LEAVES. 
Scientists may disagree about what's so good about eating 
plants—Is it the antioxidants in them? The fiber? The omega-3 
fatty acids?—but they do agree that plants are probably really 
good for you, and certainly can't hurt. In all my interviews 
with nutrition experts, the benefits of a plant-based diet pro­
vided the only point of universal consensus. Even nutrition 
scientists who have been chastened by decades of conflict and 
confusion about dietary advice would answer my question "So 
what are you still sure of?" with some variation on the rec­
ommendation to "eat more plants." (Though Marion Nestle 
was slightly more circumspect: "Certainly eating plants isn't 
harmful.") 
That plants are good for humans to eat probably doesn't 
need much elaboration, but the story of vitamin C, an anti­
oxidant we depend primarily on plants to supply us, points to 
the evolutionary reasons why this might have become the case. MOSTLY PLANTS: WHAT TO EAT Oi 163 
Way back in evolution, our ancestors possessed the biological 
ability to make vitamin C, an essential nutrient, from scratch. 
Like other antioxidants, vitamin C, or ascorbic acid, contrib­
utes to our health in at least two important ways. Several of the 
body's routine processes, including cell metabolism and the 
defense mechanism of inflammation, produce "oxygen radi­
cals"—atoms of oxygen with an extra unpaired electron that 
make them particularly eager to react with other molecules in 
ways that can create all kinds of trouble. Free radicals have been 
implicated in a great many health problems, including cancer 
and the various problems associated with aging. (Free-radical 
production rises as you get older.) Antioxidants like vitamin C 
harmlessly absorb and stabilize these radicals before they can 
do their mischief. 
But antioxidants do something else for us as well: They 
stimulate the liver to produce the enzymes necessary to break 
down the antioxidant itself, enzymes that, once produced, go 
on to break down other compounds as well, including what­
ever toxins happen to resemble the antioxidant. In this way 
antioxidants help detoxify dangerous chemicals, including car­
cinogens, and the more kinds of antioxidants in the diet, the 
more kinds of toxins the body can disarm. This is one reason 
why it's important to eat as many different kinds of plants as 
possible: They all have different antioxidants and so help the 
body eliminate different kinds of toxins. (It stands to reason 
that the more toxins there are in the environment, the more 
plants you should be eating.) 
Animals can synthesize some of their own antioxidants, 164 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
including, once upon a time, vitamin C. But there was so much 
vitamin C in our ancestors' plant-rich diet that over time we 
lost our ability to make the compound ourselves, perhaps be­
cause natural selection tends to dispense with anything super­
fluous that is metabolically expensive to produce. (The reason 
plants are such a rich source of antioxidants is that they need 
them to cope with all the pure oxygen produced during pho­
tosynthesis.) This was a happy development for the plants, of 
course, because it made humans utterly dependent upon them 
for an essential nutrient—which is why humans have been 
doing so much for the vitamin C producers ever since, spread­
ing their genes and expanding their habitat. We sometimes 
think of sweetness as the linchpin of the reciprocal relationship 
between plants and people, but antioxidants like vitamin C play 
an equally important, if less perceptible, part. 
So our biological dependence on plants goes back and 
runs deep, which makes it not at all surprising that eating 
them should be so good for us. There are literally scores of 
studies demonstrating that a diet rich in vegetables and fruits 
reduces the risk of dying from all the Western diseases. In 
countries where people eat a pound or more of fruits and veg­
etables a day, the rate of cancer is half what it is in the United 
States. We also know that vegetarians are less susceptible to 
most of the Western diseases, and as a consequence live lon­
ger than the rest of us. (Though near vegetarians—so-called 
flexitarians—are just as healthy as vegetarians.) Exactly why 
this should be so is not quite as clear as the fact that it is. The 
antioxidants in plants almost certainly are protective, but so MOSTLY PLANTS: WHAT TO EAT <©i 165 
may be the omega-3 s (also essential nutrients that we can't 
produce ourselves) and the fiber and still other plant compo­
nents and synergies as yet unrecognized; as the whole-grain 
study suggests, plant foods are apt to be more than the sum 
of their nutrient parts. 
But the advantages of a plant-based diet probably go be­
yond whatever is in the plants: Because plant foods—with the 
exception of seeds—are less energy dense than most of the 
other things you might eat, by eating a plant-based diet you 
will likely consume fewer calories (which is itself protective 
against many chronic diseases). The seed exception suggests 
why it's important to eat more leaves than seeds; though un­
refined seeds, including whole grains and nuts, can be very 
nutritious, they're high in calories, befitting their biological 
role as energy-storage devices. It's only when we begin refining 
plant seeds or eating them to the exclusion of the rest of the 
plant that we get into trouble. 
So what about eating meat? Unlike plants, which we can't 
live without, we don't need to eat meat—with the exception 
of vitamin B12, every nutrient found in meat can be obtained 
somewhere else. (And the tiny amount of B12 we need is not 
too hard to come by; it's found in all animal foods and is pro­
duced by bacteria, so you obtain B12 from eating dirty or de­
caying or fermented produce.) But meat, which humans have 
been going to heroic lengths to obtain and have been relishing 
for a very long time, is nutritious food, supplying all the es­
sential amino acids as well as many vitamins and minerals, and 
I haven't found a compelling health reason to exclude it from 166 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
the diet. (That's not to say there aren't good ethical or environ­
mental reasons to do so.*) 
That said, eating meat in the tremendous quantities we do 
(each American now consumes an average of two hundred 
pounds of meat a year) is probably not a good idea, especially 
when that meat comes from a highly industrialized food chain. 
Several studies point to the conclusion that the more meat there 
is in your diet—red meat especially—the greater your risk of 
heart disease and cancer. Yet studies of flexitarians suggest that 
small amounts of meat—less than one serving a day—don't 
appear to increase one's risk. Thomas Jefferson probably had 
the right idea when he recommended using meat more as a 
flavor principle than as a main course, treating it as a "condi­
ment for the vegetables." 
What exactly it is in meat we need to worry about (the 
saturated fat? the type of iron? the carcinogens produced in 
curing and cooking it?) is unclear; the problem could be sim­
ply that eating lots of it pushes plants out of the diet. But eat­
ing too much industrial meat exposes us to more saturated 
fat, omega-6 fatty acids, growth hormones, and carcinogens 
than we probably want in our diet. Meat has both the advan-
*Industrial meat production is notoriously brutal to the animals and 
extravagantly wasteful of resources such as water, grain, as well as antibiotics; 
the industry is also one of the biggest contributors to water and air pollution. 
A 2006 report issued by the United Nations stated that the world's livestock 
generate more greenhouse gases than the entire transportation industry. 
Henning Steinfeld, et al. Livestock's Long Shadow: Environmental Issues and Options. A 
report published by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations (Rome: FAO, 2006). Available online at http://www.virtualcentre 
.org/en/library/key pub/longshad/A070 lE00.htm. MOSTLY PLANTS : WHAT TO EAT Oi 167 
tages and disadvantages of being at the top of the food chain: 
It accumulates and concentrates many of the nutrients in the 
environment but also many of the toxins. 
Meat offers a good proof of the proposition that the health-
fulness of a food cannot be divorced from the health of the 
food chain that produced it—that the health of soil, plant, ani­
mal, and eater are all connected, for better or worse. Which 
suggests a special rule for people eating animal foods: 
«^YOU ARE WHAT WHAT YOU EAT EATS TOO. That 
is, the diet of the animals we eat has a bearing on the nutri­
tional quality, and healthfulness, of the food itself, whether it 
is meat or milk or eggs. This should be self-evident, yet it is a 
truth routinely overlooked by the industrial food chain in its 
quest to produce vast quantities of cheap animal protein. That 
quest has changed the diet of most of our food animals from 
plants to seeds, because animals grow faster and produce more 
milk and eggs on a high-energy diet of grain. But some of 
our food animals, such as cows and sheep, are ruminants that 
evolved to eat grass; if they eat too many seeds they become 
sick, which is why grain-fed cattle have to be given antibiotics. 
Even animals that do well on grain, such as chickens and pigs, 
are much healthier when they have access to green plants, and 
so, it turns out, are their meat and eggs. 
For most of our food animals, a diet of grass means much 
healthier fats (more omega-3 s and conjugated linoleic acid, 
or CLA; fewer omega-6s and saturated fat) in their meat, milk, 
and eggs, as well as appreciably higher levels of vitamins and 
antioxidants. Sometimes you can actually see the difference, as 168 O) IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
when butter is yellow or egg yolks bright orange: What you're 
seeing is the beta-carotene from fresh green grass. It's worth 
looking for pastured animal foods in the market and paying the 
premium they typically command. For though from the out­
side an industrial egg looks exactly like a pastured egg selling 
for several times as much, they are for all intents and purposes 
two completely different foods.* So the rule about eating more 
leaves and fewer seeds applies not only to us but also to the 
animals in our food chain. 
<MF YOU HAVE THE SPACE, BUY A FREEZER. When 
you find a good source of pastured meat, you'll want to buy it 
in quantity. Buying meat in bulk—a quarter of a steer, say, or 
a whole hog—is one way to eat well on a budget. Dedicated 
freezers are surprisingly inexpensive to buy and to operate, 
because they don't get opened nearly as often as the one at­
tached to your refrigerator. A freezer will also encourage you 
to put up food from the farmers' market, allowing you to buy 
produce in bulk when it is at the height of its season, which 
is when it will be most abundant and therefore cheapest. And 
freezing (unlike canning) does not significantly diminish the 
nutritional value of produce. 
*"Free range" doesn't necessarily mean the chicken has had access to grass; 
many egg and broiler producers offer their chickens little more than a dirt yard 
where nothing grows. Look for the word "pastured." And in the case of beef, 
keep in mind that all cattle are grass fed until they get to the feedlot; "grass 
finished" or " 100% grass fed" is what you want. For more on the nutritional 
benefits of pastured food and where to find it, go to eatwild.com. MOSTLY PLANTS: WHAT TO EAT « 169 
^ EAT LIKE AN o M NI v O R E . Whether or not you eat any 
animal foods, it's a good idea to try to add some new species, 
and not just new foods, to your diet. The dazzling diversity of 
food products on offer in the supermarket is deceptive because 
so many of them are made from the same small handful of 
plants, and most of those—like the corn and soy and wheat— 
are seeds. The greater the diversity of species you eat, the more 
likely you are to cover all your nutritional bases. 
But that is an argument from nutritionism, and there is a 
better one, one that takes a broader view of health. Biodiversity 
in the diet means more biodiversity in the fields. To shrink the 
monocultures that now feed us would mean farmers won't 
need to spray as much pesticide or chemical fertilizer, which 
would mean healthier soils, healthier plants and animals, and 
in turn healthier people. Your health isn't bordered by your 
body, and what's good for the soil is probably good for you 
too. Which brings us to a related rule: 
^EAT WELL-GROWN FOOD FROM HEALTHY SOILS. 
It would have been much simpler to say "eat organic" because 
it is true that food certified organic is usually well grown in 
relatively healthy soils—soils that have been nourished by or­
ganic matter rather than synthetic fertilizers. Yet there are ex­
ceptional farmers and ranchers in America who for one reason 
or another are not certified organic and the food they grow 
should not be overlooked. Organic is important, but it's not 
the last word on how to grow food well. 
Also, the supermarket today is brimming with processed 
organic food products that are little better, at least from the 170 O) IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
standpoint of health, than their conventional counterparts. 
Organic Oreos are not a health food. When Coca-Cola begins 
selling organic Coke, as it surely will, the company will have 
struck a blow for the environment perhaps, but not for our 
health. Most consumers automatically assume that the word 
"organic" is synonymous with health, but it makes no dif­
ference to your insulin metabolism if the high-fructose corn 
syrup in your soda is organic. 
Yet the superiority of real food grown in healthy soils 
seems clear. There is now a small but growing body of em­
pirical research to support the hypothesis, first advanced by 
Sir Albert Howard and J. I. Rodale, that soils rich in organic 
matter produce more nutritious food. Recently a handful of 
well-controlled comparisons of crops grown organically and 
conventionally have found appreciably higher levels of anti­
oxidants, flavonoids, vitamins, and other nutrients in several 
of the organic crops. Of course after a few days riding cross­
country in a truck the nutritional quality of any kind of pro­
duce will deteriorate, so ideally you want to look for food that 
is both organic and local. 
^EAT WILD FOODS WHEN YOU C A N . Two of the most 
nutritious plants in the world are weeds—lamb's quarters and 
purslane—and some of the healthiest traditional diets, such as 
the Mediterranean, make frequent use of wild greens. The fields 
and forests are crowded with plants containing higher levels of 
various phytochemicals than their domesticated cousins. Why? 
Because these plants have to defend themselves against pests 
and disease without any help from us, and because historically MOSTLY PLANTS: WHAT TO EAT <©i 171 
*Joseph Hibbeln, et al., "Healthy Intakes of n-3 and n-6 Fatty Acids: 
Estimations Considering Worldwide Diversity," American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition (2006): 83 (suppl): 14835-935; Hibbeln, et al., "Dietary 
Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Depression: When Cholesterol Does Not 
Satisfy." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition (1995): 62:1-9. we've tended to select and breed crop plants for sweetness; 
many of the defensive compounds plants produce are bitter. 
Wild greens also tend to have higher levels of omega-3 fatty 
acids than their domesticated cousins, which have been se­
lected to hold up longer after picking. 
Wild animals too are worth adding to your diet when you 
have the opportunity. Wild game generally has less saturated 
fat and more omega-3 fatty acids than domesticated animals, 
because most of the wild animals we eat themselves eat a di­
verse diet of plants rather than grain. (The nutritional profile 
of grass-fed beef closely resembles that of wild game.) Wild 
fish generally have higher levels of omega-3 s than farmed fish, 
which are often fed grain. To judge by the experience of fish-
eating cultures like the Japanese, adding a few servings of wild 
fish to the diet each week may lower our risk of heart disease, 
prolong our lives, and even make us happier.* 
Yet I hesitate to recommend eating wild foods because so 
many of them are endangered; many wild fish stocks are on 
the verge of collapse because of overfishing. Up to now, all the 
recommendations I've offered here pose no conflict between 
what's best for your health and what's best for the environ­
ment. Indeed, most of them support farming and ranching 
practices that improve the health of the land and the water. But 
not this one, sorry to say. There are not enough wild animals 172 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
left for us all to be eating more of them (except perhaps deer 
and feral pigs), and certainly not enough wild fish. Fortunately, 
however, a few of the most nutritious fish species, including 
salmon, mackerel, sardines, and anchovies, are well managed 
and in some cases even abundant. Don't overlook those oily 
little fish. 
& BE THE KIND OF PERSON WHO TAKES SUPPLE­
MENTS. We know that people who take supplements are gen­
erally healthier than the rest of us, and we also know that, in 
controlled studies, most of the supplements they take don't ap­
pear to work. Probably the supplement takers are healthier for 
reasons having nothing to do with the pills: They're typically 
more health conscious, better educated, and more affluent. So 
to the extent you can, be the kind of person who would take 
supplements, and then save your money. 
That said, many of the nutrition experts I consulted rec­
ommend taking a multivitamin, especially as you get older. In 
theory at least, your diet should provide all the micronutrients 
you need to be healthy, especially if you're eating real food and 
lots of plants. After all, we evolved to obtain whatever our bod­
ies need from nature and wouldn't be here if we couldn't. But 
natural selection takes litde interest in our health or survival 
after the childbearing years are past, and as we age our need for 
antioxidants increases while our bodies' ability to absorb them 
from food declines. So it's probably a good idea, and certainly 
can't hurt, to take a multivitamin-and-mineral pill after age 
fifty. And if you don't eat much fish, it might be wise to take a 
fish oil supplement too. MOSTLY PLANTS: WHAT TO EAT 173 
& EAT MORE LIKE THE FRENCH. OR THE ITAL­
IANS. OR THE JAPANESE. OR THE INDIANS. OR 
THE GREEKS. Confounding factors aside, people who eat 
according to the rules of a traditional food culture are gener­
ally much healthier than people eating a contemporary West­
ern diet. This goes for the Japanese and other Asian diets as well 
as the traditional diets of Mexico, India, and the Mediterranean 
region, including France, Italy, and Greece. There may be ex­
ceptions to this rule—you do have to wonder about the Eastern 
European Jewish diet of my ancestors. Though who knows? 
Chicken and duck fat may turn out to be much healthier than 
scientists presently believe. (Weston Price certainly wouldn't 
be surprised.) I'm inclined to think any traditional diet will 
do; if it wasn't a healthy regimen, the diet and the people who 
followed it wouldn't still be around. 
There are of course two dimensions to a traditional diet— 
the foods a culture eats and how they eat them—and both may 
be equally important to our health. Let's deal first with the 
content of traditional diets and save the form of it, or eating 
habits, for the next section. 
In some respects, traditional diets resemble other vernacu­
lar creations of culture such as architecture. Through a long, 
incremental process of trial and error, cultures discover what 
works—how best to reconcile human needs with whatever 
nature has to offer us in a particular place. So the pitch of a 
roof reflects the amount of rain or snowfall in a particular re­
gion, growing steeper the greater the precipitation, and some­
thing like the spiciness of a cuisine reflects the local climate in 
another way. Eating spicy foods help people keep cool; many 174 <©> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
spices also have antimicrobial properties, which is important 
in warm climates where food is apt to spoil rapidly. And indeed 
researchers have found that the hotter a climate is, the more 
spices will be found in the local cuisine. 
Of course cuisines are not only concerned with health or 
even biology; many culinary practices are arbitrary and pos­
sibly even maladaptive, like the polishing of rice. Cuisines can 
have purely cultural functions; they're one of the ways a soci­
ety expresses its identity and underscores its differences with 
other societies. (Religious food rules like kashruth or halal per­
form this function for, respectively, Jews and Muslims.) These 
cultural purposes might explain why cuisines tend to resist 
change; it is often said that the last place to look for signs of 
assimilation in an immigrant s home is the pantry. Though as 
food psychologist Paul Rozin points out, the abiding "flavor 
principles" of a cuisine—whether lemon and olive oil in the 
Mediterranean, soy sauce and ginger in Asia, or even ketchup 
in America—make it easier for a culture to incorporate useful 
new foods that might otherwise taste unacceptably foreign. 
Yet more than many other cultural practices, eating is 
deeply rooted in nature—in human biology on one side and 
in the natural world on the other. The specific combinations 
of foods in a cuisine and the ways they are prepared consti­
tute a deep reservoir of accumulated wisdom about diet and 
health and place. Many traditional culinary practices are the 
products of a kind of biocultural evolution, the ingenuity of 
which modern science occasionally figures out long after the 
fact. In Latin America, corn is traditionally eaten with beans; MOSTLY PLANTS: WHAT TO EAT « 175 
each plant is deficient in an essential amino acid that happens 
to be abundant in the other, so together corn and beans form 
a balanced diet in the absence of meat. Similarly, corn in these 
countries is traditionally ground or soaked with limestone, 
which makes available a B vitamin in the corn, the absence of 
which would otherwise lead to the deficiency disease called 
pellagra. Very often when a society adopts a new food without 
the food culture surrounding it, as happened when corn first 
came to Europe, Africa, and Asia, people get sick. The context 
in which a food is eaten can be nearly as important as the food 
itself. 
The ancient Asian practice of fermenting soybeans and 
eating soy in the form of curds called tofu makes a healthy 
diet from a plant that eaten almost any other way would make 
people ill. The soybean itself is a notably inauspicious staple 
food; it contains a whole assortment of "antinutrients"—com­
pounds that actually block the body's absorption of vitamins 
and minerals, interfere with the hormonal system, and prevent 
the body from breaking down the proteins in the soy itself. It 
took the food cultures of Asia to figure out how to turn this 
unpromising plant into a highly nutritious food. By boiling 
crushed soybeans in water to form a kind of milk and then 
precipitating the liquid by adding gypsum (calcium sulfate), 
cooks were able to form the soy into curds of highly digestible 
protein: tofu. 
So how are these traditional methods of "food process­
ing" different from newer kinds of food science? Only in that 
the traditional methods have stood the test of time, keeping 176 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
people well nourished and healthy generation after genera­
tion. One of the hallmarks of a traditional diet is its essential 
conservatism. Traditions in food ways reflect long experience 
and often embody a nutritional logic that we shouldn't heed­
lessly overturn. So consider this subclause to the rule about 
eating a traditional diet: 
«REGARD NONTRAD1TIONAL FOODS WITH SKEP­
TICISM. Innovation is interesting, but when it comes to 
something like food, it pays to approach novelties with cau­
tion. If diets are the product of an evolutionary process, then 
a novel food or culinary innovation resembles a mutation: It 
might represent a revolutionary improvement, but it probably 
doesn't. It was really interesting when modernist architecture 
dispensed with the pitched roof; on the other hand, the flat 
roofs that replaced them tended to leak. 
Soy again offers an interesting case in point. Americans are 
eating more soy products than ever before, thanks largely to 
the ingenuity of an industry eager to process and sell the vast 
amounts of subsidized soy coming off American and South 
American farms. But today we're eating soy in ways Asian cul­
tures with much longer experience of the plant would not 
recognize: "Soy protein isolate," "soy isoflavones," "textured 
vegetable protein" from soy and soy oils (which now account 
for a fifth of the calories in the American diet) are finding 
their way into thousands of processed foods, with the result 
that Americans now eat more soy than the Japanese or the 
Chinese do. MOSTLY PLANTS: WHAT TO EAT «» 177 
Yet there are questions about the implications of these novel 
food products for our health. Soy isoflavones, found in most 
soy products, are compounds that resemble estrogen, and in 
fact bind to human estrogen receptors. But it is unclear whether 
these so-called phytoestrogens actually behave like estrogen in 
the body or only fool it into thinking they're estrogen. Either 
way the phytoestrogens might have an effect (good or bad) on 
the growth of certain cancers, the symptoms of menopause, 
and the function of the endocrine system. Because of these 
uncertainties, the FDA has declined to grant GRAS ("generally 
regarded as safe") status to soy isoflavones used as a food addi­
tive. As a senior scientist at the FDA's National Center forToxi-
cological Research wrote, "Confidence that soy products are 
safe is clearly based more on belief than hard data." Until those 
data come in, I feel more comfortable eating soy prepared in 
the traditional Asian style than according to novel recipes de­
veloped by processors like Archer Daniels Midland. 
© DON'T LOOK FOR THE MAGIC BULLET IN THE 
TRADITIONAL DIET. In the same way that foods are more 
than the sum of their nutrient parts, dietary patterns seem to 
be more than the sum of the foods that comprise them. Oceans 
of ink have been spilled attempting to tease out and analyze the 
components of the Mediterranean diet, hoping to identify the 
X factor responsible for its healthfulness: Is it the olive oil? The 
fish?The wild greens?The garlic?The nuts?The French paradox 
too has been variously attributed to the salutary effects of red 
wine, olive oil, and even foie gras (liver is high in B vitamins 178 «>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
and iron). Yet when researchers extract a single food from a 
diet of proven value, it usually fails to adequately explain why 
the people living on that diet live longer or have lower rates of 
heart disease or cancer than people eating a modern Western 
diet. The whole of a dietary pattern is evidently greater than 
the sum of its parts. 
Some of these dietary parts flagrantly contradict current 
scientific thinking about healthy eating. By the standards of 
most official dietary guidelines, the French eat poorly: way too 
much saturated fat and wine. The Greeks too have their own 
paradox; defying the recommendation that we get no more 
than 30 percent of our calories from fats, they get 40 percent, 
most of it in the form of olive oil. So researchers begin look­
ing for synergies between nutrients: Might the antioxidants in 
the red wine help metabolize the fats? Perhaps. But it seems 
unlikely that any single food, nutrient, or mechanism will 
ever explain the French paradox; more likely, we will someday 
come to realize there never was a paradox. Dietary paradoxes 
are best thought of as breakdowns in nutritionist thinking, a 
sign of something wrong with the scientific consensus rather 
than the diet in question. 
But the quest to pin down the X factor in the diets of healthy 
populations (PubMed, a scholarly index to scientific articles 
on medicine, lists 257 entries under "French Paradox" and 
another 828 under "Mediterranean Diet") goes on, because re­
ductionist science is understandably curious and nutritionism 
demands it. If the secret ingredient could be identified, then 
processed foods could be reengineered to contain more of it, MOSTLY PLANTS: WHAT TO EAT 179 
and we could go on eating much as before. The only way to 
profit from the wisdom of traditional diets (aside from writing 
books about them) is to break them down using reductionist 
science and then sell them for their nutrient parts. 
In recent years a less reductive method of doing nutritional 
science has emerged, based on the idea of studying whole di­
etary patterns instead of individual foods or nutrients. The 
early results have tended to support the idea that traditional 
diets do indeed protect us from chronic disease and that these 
diets can be transferred from one place and population to an­
other. Even some of the researchers associated with the Nurses' 
Health Study have begun doing dietary pattern analysis, in one 
case comparing a prudent diet modeled on Mediterranean and 
Asian patterns—high in fruits, vegetables, and fish and low in 
red meat and dairy products—with a typical Western diet fea­
turing lots of meat (and processed meat), refined grains, sug­
ary foods, french fries, and dairy products. (The study found 
"strong evidence" that the prudent dietary pattern may reduce 
the risk of coronary heart disease.)* Another recent study of a 
traditional plant-based diet found that even when you tested it 
against a low-fat Western diet that contained the same propor­
tions of total fat, saturated fat, protein, carbohydrates, and cho­
lesterol, the people on the traditional diet did much better by 
an important measure of cardiovascular health. What this sug-
*Frank B. Hu, et al., "Prospective Study of Major Dietary Patterns and Risk 
of Coronary Heart Disease in Men," .American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2000; 
72:912-21. 180 *>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
gests is that the addition of certain foods to the diet (Vegetables 
and fruits? Whole grains? Garlic?) may be more important than 
the subtraction of the usual nutritional suspects.* 
As the authors of the first study point out, the strength 
of such an approach is that "it more closely parallels the real 
world" in that "it can take into account complicated interac­
tions among nutrients and non-nutrient substances in studies 
of free-living people." The weakness of such an approach is 
that "it cannot be specific about the particular nutrients re­
sponsible" for whatever health effects have been observed. Of 
course, this is a weakness only from the perspective of nutri­
tionism. The inability to pin down the key nutrient matters 
much more to the scientist (and the food industry) than it does 
to us "free-living" eaters in the real world. 
*Christopher Gardner et al. "The Effect of a Plant-Based Diet on Plasma Lipids 
in Hypercholesterolemic Adults," Annals of Internal Medicine, 2005; 142: 725-33. 
Other similar trials have found striking protective effects in more traditional, 
plant-based dietary patterns that no single nutrient can adequately explain. 
In the D.A.S.H. (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) study, a diet rich 
in fruits and vegetables and low in saturated fat reduced blood pressure even 
when salt intake and weight remained unchanged. (Lawrence J. Appel, et al., 
"A Clinical Trial of the Effects of Dietary Patterns on Blood Pressure," New England 
Journal of Medicine, Vol. 336, No. 16, April 17, 1997.) Neither of these studies 
relied on food-frequency questionnaires; rather, the researchers prepared 
the meals for the participants. The Lyon Diet Heart Study found that the 
Mediterranean diet, when compared to a Western diet, offered protection 
against a second heart attack during the four years patients were followed. 
(Michel de Lorgeril et al., "Mediterranean Diet,Traditional Risk Factors, and 
the Rate of Cardiovascular Complications after Myocardial Infarction," 
Circulation, 1999:99; 779-85.) MOSTLY PLANTS: WHAT TO EAT <* 181 
«HAVE A GLASS OF WINE WITH D I N N E R . Wine may 
not be the X factor in the French or Mediterranean diet, but it 
does seem to be an integral part of those dietary patterns. There 
is now abundant scientific evidence for the health benefits of 
alcohol to go with a few centuries of traditional belief and 
anecdotal evidence. Mindful of the social and health effects of 
alcoholism, public health authorities are loath to recommend 
drinking, but the fact is that people who drink moderately and 
regularly live longer and suffer considerably less heart disease 
than teetotalers. Alcohol of any kind appears to reduce the risk 
of heart disease, but the polyphenols in red wine (resveratrol 
in particular) appear to have unique protective qualities. The 
benefits to your heart increase with the amount of alcohol 
consumed up to about four drinks a day (depending on your 
size), yet drinking that much increases your risk of dying from 
other causes (including certain cancers and accidents), so most 
experts recommend no more than two drinks a day for men, 
one for women. The health benefits of alcohol may depend as 
much on the pattern of drinking as on the amount: Drinking 
a little every day is better than drinking a lot on the week­
ends, and drinking with food is better than drinking without 
it. (Food blunts some of the deleterious effects of alcohol by 
slowing its absorption.) Also, a diet particularly rich in plant 
foods, as the French and Mediterranean diets are, supplies 
precisely the B vitamins that drinking alcohol depletes. How 
fortunate! Someday science may comprehend all the complex 
synergies at work in a traditional diet that includes wine, but 
until then we can marvel at its accumulated wisdom—and 
raise a glass to paradox. FOUR o. NOT TOO MUCH: 
HOW TO EAT 
If a food is more than the sum of its nutrients and a diet is 
more than the sum of its foods, it follows that a food culture 
is more than the sum of its menus—it embraces as well the set 
of manners, eating habits, and unspoken rules that together 
govern a people's relationship to food and eating. How a cul­
ture eats may have just as much of a bearing on health as what 
a culture eats. The foodstuffs of another people are often easier 
to borrow than their food habits, it's true, but to adopt some 
of these habits would do at least as much for our health and 
happiness as eaters. 
What nutritionism sees when it looks at the French para­
dox is a lot of slender French people eating gobs of saturated 
fat washed down with wine. What it fails to see is a people 
with a completely different relationship to food than we have. 
Nutritionists pay far more attention to the chemistry of food 
than to the sociology or ecology of eating. All their studies of 
the benefits of red wine or foie gras overlook the fact that the 
French eat very differently than we do. They seldom snack, and 
they eat most of their food at meals shared with other people. 
They eat small portions and don't come back for seconds. And 
they spend considerably more time eating than we do. Taken 
together, these habits contribute to a food culture in which NOT TOO MUCH: HOW TO EAT *>> 183 
the French consume fewer calories than we do, yet manage to 
enjoy them far more. 
Paul Rozin has confirmed many of these observations in a 
comparison of French and American eating habits conducted 
in restaurants in Paris and Philadelphia. Rozin focused on por­
tion size and time spent eating. He found that serving sizes in 
France, both in restaurants and supermarkets, are considerably 
smaller than they are in the United States. This matters because 
most people have what psychologists call a unit bias—we tend 
to believe that however big or small the portion served, that's 
the proper amount to eat. Rozin also found that the French 
spend considerably more time enjoying their tiny servings 
than we do our Brobdingnagian ones. "Although they eat less 
than Americans," Rozin writes, "the French spend more time 
eating, and hence get more food experience while eating less." 
He suggests that the French gift for extracting more food ex­
perience from fewer calories may help explain why the French 
are slimmer and healthier than we are. This sounds like an emi­
nently sensible approach to eating and suggests an overarching 
policy that might nudge us in that direction. 
« PAY MORE, EAT LESS. What the French case suggests 
is that there is a trade-off in eating between quantity and 
quality. 
The American food system has for more than a century de­
voted its energies to quantity and price rather than to quality. 
Turning out vast quantities of so-so food sold in tremendous 
packages at a terrific price is what we do well. Yes, you can 
find exceptional food in America, and increasingly so, but his-184 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
torically the guiding principle has been, in the slogan of one 
supermarket chain, to "pile it high and sell it cheap." 
There's no escaping the fact that better food—whether 
measured by taste or nutritional quality (which often corre­
spond)—costs more, usually because it has been grown with 
more care and less intensively. Not everyone can afford to eat 
high-quality food in America, and that is shameful; however, 
those of us who can, should. Doing so benefits not only your 
health (by, among other things, reducing your exposure to pes­
ticides and pharmaceuticals), but also the health of the people 
who grow the food as well as the people who live downstream 
and downwind of the farms where it is grown. 
Another important benefit of paying more for better-quality 
food is that you're apt to eat less of it. 
"Eat less" is the most unwelcome advice of all, but in fact 
the scientific case for eating a lot less than we presently do is 
compelling, whether or not you are overweight. Calorie re­
striction has repeatedly been shown to slow aging and prolong 
lifespan in animals, and some researchers believe it is the single 
strongest link between a change in the diet and the prevention 
of cancer. Put simply: Overeating promotes cell division, and 
promotes it most dramatically in cancer cells; cutting back on 
calories slows cell division. It also stifles the production of free 
radicals, curbs inflammation, and reduces the risk of most of 
the Western diseases. 
"Eat less" is easier said than done, however, particularly in a 
culture of cheap and abundant calories with no deeply rooted 
set of rules to curb overeating. But other cultures do have such 
rules and we can try to emulate them. The French have their NOT TOO MUCH: HOW TO EAT <©> 185 
*In one study Wansink rigged up bowls of soup in a restaurant so they would 
automatically refill from the bottom; those given the bottomless bowl ate 73 
percent more soup than the subjects eating from an ordinary bowl; several ate 
as much as a quart. When one of these hearty eaters was asked his opinion of 
the soup, he said, "It's pretty good, and it's pretty filling." Indeed. modest portions and taboo against seconds. The people of Oki­
nawa, one of the longest-lived and healthiest populations in 
the world, practice a principle they call hara hachi bu: Eat until 
you are 80 percent full. 
This is a sensible idea, but also easier said than done: How 
in the world do you know when you're 80 percent full? You'd 
need to be in closer touch with your senses than many Ameri­
cans at the table have become. As Rozin and other psycholo­
gists have demonstrated, Americans typically eat not until 
they're full (and certainly not until they're 80 percent full) but 
rather until they receive some visual cue from their environ­
ment that it's time to stop: the bowl or package is empty, the 
plate is clean, or the TV show is over. Brian Wansink, a Cornell 
professor of marketing and nutritional science who has done 
several ingenious studies on portion size and appetite, con­
cludes that Americans pay much more attention to external 
than to internal cues about satiety* By comparison the French, 
who seem to attend more closely to all the sensual dimensions 
of eating, also pay more attention to the internal cues telling 
us we feel full. 
So how might paying more for food help us eat less of it? 
In two ways. It is well established that how much we eat is 
strongly influenced by the cost of food in terms of both the 
money and effort required to put it on the table. The rise in 186 0> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
obesity in America began around 1980, exactly when a flood 
of cheap calories started coming off American farms, prompted 
by the Nixon-era changes in agricultural policy. American 
farmers produced 600 more calories per person per day in 
2000 than they did in 1980. But some calories got cheaper 
than others: Since 1980, the price of sweeteners and added 
fats (most of them derived, respectively, from subsidized corn 
and subsidized soybeans) dropped 20 percent, while the price 
of fresh fruits and vegetables increased by 40 percent. It is the 
cheaper and less healthful of these two kinds of calories on 
which Americans have been gorging. 
These are precisely the kinds of calories found in conve­
nience food—snacks, microwavable entrées, soft drinks, and 
packaged food of all kind—which happens to be the source of 
most of the 300 or so extra calories Americans have added to 
their daily diet since 1980. So these foods are cheap in a sec­
ond sense too: They require very little, if any, time or effort to 
prepare, which is the other reason we eat more of them. How 
often would you eat french fries if you had to peel, wash, cut 
and fry them yourself—and then clean up the mess? Or ever 
eat Twinkies if you had to bake the little cakes and then squirt 
the filling into them and clean up? 
Recently a group of Harvard economists seeking to advance 
an economic theory for the obesity epidemic correlated the 
rise in the average weight of Americans with a decline in the 
"time cost" of eating—cooking, cleaning up, and so on. They 
concluded that the widespread availability of cheap conve­
nience foods could explain most of the twelve-pound increase NOT TOO MUCH: HOW TO EAT «i 187 
in the weight of the average American since the early 1960s. 
They point out that in 1980 less than 10 percent of Ameri­
cans owned a microwave; by 1999 that figure had reached 83 
percent of households. As technology reduces the time cost of 
food, we tend to eat more of it.* 
My guess is that the converse still holds true, and that pay­
ing more for food—in every sense—will reduce the amount 
of it we eat. Several of the rules offered below are aimed in 
that direction. While it is true that many people simply can't 
afford to pay more for food, either in money or time or both, 
many more of us can. After all, just in the last decade or two 
we've somehow found the time in the day to spend several 
hours on the Internet and the money in the budget not only 
to pay for broadband service, but to cover a second phone bill 
and a new monthly bill for television, formerly free. For the 
majority of Americans, spending more for better food is less a 
matter of ability than priority. We spend a smaller percentage 
of our income on food than any other industrialized society; 
surely if we decided that the quality of our food mattered, we 
could afford to spend a few more dollars on it a week—and 
eat a little less of it. 
Is it just a coincidence that as the portion of our income 
spent on food has declined, spending on health care has soared? 
In 1960 Americans spent 17.5 percent of their income on food 
and 5.2 percent of national income on health care. Since then, 
*David M. Cutler, et al., "Why Have Americans Become More Obese?," Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 17, No. 3 (summer, 2003), pp. 93-118. 188 <>> IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
those numbers have flipped: Spending on food has fallen to 
9.9 percent, while spending on health care has climbed to 16 
percent of national income. I have to think that by spending a 
little more on healthier food we could reduce the amount we 
have to spend on health care. 
To make the overall recommendation to "pay more, eat 
less" more palatable, consider that quality itself, besides tend­
ing to cost more, may have a direct bearing on the quantity 
you'll want to eat. The better the food, the less of it you need to 
eat in order to feel satisfied. All carrots are not created equal, 
and the best ones—the ones really worth savoring—are sim­
ply more satisfying, bite for bite. To borrow Paul Rozin's term, 
exceptional food offers us more "food experience"—per bite, 
per dish, per meal—and as the French have shown, you don't 
need a lot of food to have a rich food experience. Choose qual­
ity over quantity, food experience over mere calories. 
^ EAT MEALS. This recommendation sounds almost as ri­
diculous as "eat food," but in America at least, it no longer 
goes without saying. We are snacking more and eating fewer 
meals together. Indeed, sociologists who study American eat­
ing habits no longer organize their results around the increas­
ingly quaint concept of the meal: They now measure "eating 
occasions" and report that Americans have added to the tra­
ditional big three—breakfast, lunch, and dinner—an as-yet-
untitled fourth daily eating occasion that lasts all day long: 
the constant sipping and snacking we do while watching TV, 
driving, and so on. One study found that among eighteen- to NOT TOO MUCH: HOW TO EAT Oi 189 
*The study, commissioned by industry and unpublished, was conducted by 
John Nihoff, a professor of gastronomy at the Culinary Institute of America. fifty-year-old Americans, roughly a fifth of all eating now takes 
place in the car.* 
That one should feel the need to mount a defense of "the 
meal" is sad, but then I never would have thought "food" 
needed defending, either. Most readers will recall the benefits 
of eating meals without much prompting from me. It is at the 
dinner table that we socialize and civilize our children, teach­
ing them manners and the art of conversation. At the dinner 
table parents can determine portion sizes, model eating and 
drinking behavior, and enforce social norms about greed and 
gluttony and waste. Shared meals are about much more than 
fueling bodies; they are uniquely human institutions where 
our species developed language and this thing we call culture. 
Do I need to go on? 
All this is so well understood that when pollsters ask Amer­
icans if they eat together as a family most nights, they offer a 
resounding—and resoundingly untrue—reply in the affirma­
tive. In fact, most American families today report eating dinner 
together three to four nights a week, but even those meals 
bear only the faintest resemblance to the Norman Rockwell 
ideal. If you install video cameras in the kitchen and dining-
room ceilings above typical American families, as marketers for 
the major food companies have done, you'll quickly discover 
that the reality of the family dinner has diverged substantially 
from our image of it. Mom might still cook something for 190 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
herself and sit at the table for a while, but she'll be alone for 
much of that time. That's because dad and each of the kids are 
likely to prepare an entirely different entrée for themselves, 
"preparing" in this case being a synonym for microwaving 
a package. Each family member might then join mom at the 
table for as long as it takes to eat, but not necessarily all at the 
same time. Technically, this kind of feeding counts as a fam­
ily dinner in the survey results, though it's hard to believe it 
performs all the customary functions of a shared meal. Kraft 
or General Mills, for instance, is now determining the portion 
sizes, not mom, and the social value of sharing food is lost. It 
looks a lot more like a restaurant meal, where everyone orders 
his or her own dish. (Though the service isn't quite as good, 
because the entrées don't arrive at the same time.) Of course, 
people tend to eat more when they can have exactly what they 
want—which is precisely why the major food companies ap­
prove of this modernized family meal and have done every­
thing in their considerable power to foster it. So they market 
different kinds of entrées to each member of the family (low 
carb for the dieting teenager, low cholesterol for dad, high fat 
for the eight-year-old, and so on), and engineer these "home 
meal replacements," as they're known in the trade, so that even 
the eight-year-old can safely microwave them. 
But the biggest threat to the meal-as-we-knew-it is surely 
the snack, and snacking in recent years has colonized whole 
new parts of our day and places in our lives. Work, for example, 
used to be a more or less food-free stretch of time between 
meals, but no longer. Offices now typically have well-stocked 
kitchens, and it is apparently considered gauche at a business NOT TOO MUCH: HOW TO EAT *» 191 
meeting or conference if a spread of bagels, muffins, pastries, 
and soft drinks is not provided at frequent intervals. Attending 
a recent conference on nutrition and health, of all things, I 
was astounded to see that in addition to the copious buffet at 
breakfast, lunch, and dinner, our hosts wheeled out a copious 
buffet halfway between breakfast and lunch and then again 
halfway between lunch and dinner, evidently worried that we 
would not be able to survive the long crossing from one meal 
to the next without a between-meal meal. 
I may be showing my age, but didn't there used to be at least 
a mild social taboo against the between-meal snack? Well, it is 
gone. Americans today mark time all day long with nibbles of 
food and sips of soft drinks, which must be constantly at their 
sides, lest they expire during the haul between breakfast and 
lunch. (The snack food and beverage industry has surely been 
the great beneficiary of the new social taboo against smoking, 
which used to perform much the same time-marking func­
tion.) We have reengineered our cars to accommodate our 
snacks, adding bigger cup holders and even refrigerated glove 
compartments, and we've reengineered foods to be more easily 
eaten in the car. According to the Harvard economists' calcula­
tions, the bulk of the calories we've added to our diet over the 
past twenty years has come in the form of snacks. I don't need 
to point out that these snacks tend not to consist of fruits and 
vegetables. (Not even at my nutrition conference.) Or that the 
portion sizes have swelled or that the snacks themselves con­
sist mainly of cleverly flavored and configured arrangements 
of refined carbohydrates, hydrogenated oils, corn sweeteners, 
and salt. 192 Oi IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
To counter the rise of the snack and restore the meal to its 
rightful place, consider as a start these few rules of thumb: 
^DO ALL YOUR EATING AT A TABLE. No, a desk is 
not a table. 
«DON'T GET YOUR FUEL FROM THE SAME PLACE 
YOUR CAR DOES. American gas stations now make more 
money selling food (and cigarettes) than gasoline, but consider 
what kind of food this is: except perhaps for the milk and water, 
it's all highly processed nonperishable snack foods and extrava-
gandy sweetened soft drinks in hefty twenty-ounce botdes. Gas 
stations have become processed-corn stations: ethanol outside 
for your car and high-fructose corn syrup inside for you. 
TRY NOT TO EAT ALONE. Americans are increasingly 
eating in solitude. Though there is research suggesting that 
light eaters will eat more when they dine with others (prob­
ably because they spend more time at the table), for people 
prone to overeating, communal meals tend to limit consump­
tion, if only because we're less likely to stuff ourselves when 
others are watching. This is precisely why so much food mar­
keting is designed to encourage us to eat in front of the TV or 
in the car: When we eat mindlessly and alone, we eat more. 
But regulating appetite is the least of it: The shared meal el­
evates eating from a mechanical process of fueling the body to 
a ritual of family and community, from mere animal biology 
to an act of culture. NOT TOO MUCH: HOW TO EAT <©> 193 
« CONSULT YOUR GUT. As the psychologists have dem­
onstrated, most of us allow external, and mostly visual, cues to 
determine how much we eat. The larger the portion, the more 
we eat; the bigger the container, the more we pour; the more 
conspicuous the vending machine, the more we buy from it; 
the closer the bowl of M&Ms, the more of them we eat. All of 
which makes us easy marks for food marketers eager to sell us 
yet more food. 
As in so many areas of modern life, the culture of food has 
become a culture of the eye. But when it comes to eating, it 
pays to cultivate the other senses, which often provide more 
useful and accurate information. Does this peach smell as good 
as it looks? Does the third bite of that dessert taste anywhere 
near as good as the first? I could certainly eat more of this, but 
am I really still hungry? 
Supposedly it takes twenty minutes before the brain gets 
the word that the belly is full; unfortunately most of us take 
considerably less than twenty minutes to finish a meal, with 
the result that the sensation of feeling full exerts little if any in­
fluence on how much we eat. What this suggests is that eating 
more slowly, and then consulting our sense of satiety, might 
help us to eat less. The French are better at this than we are, as 
Brian Wansink discovered when he asked a group of French 
people how they knew when to stop eating. "When I feel full," 
they replied. (What a novel idea! The Americans said things like 
"When my plate is clean" or "When I run out.") Perhaps it is 
their long, leisurely meals that give the French the opportunity 
to realize when they're full. 194 «i IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
At least until we learn to eat more slowly and attend more 
closely to the information of our senses, it might help to work 
on altering the external clues we rely on in eating on the theory 
that it's probably better to manipulate ourselves than to allow 
marketers to manipulate us. Wansink offers dozens of helpful 
tips in a recent book called Mindless Eating: Why We Eat More Than We 
Think, though I warn you they're all vaguely insulting to your 
sense of yourself as a creature in possession of free will. 
Serve smaller portions on smaller plates; serve food and 
beverages from small containers (even if this means repackag­
ing things bought in jumbo sizes) ; leave detritus on the table— 
empty bottles, bones, and so forth—so you can see how much 
you've eaten or drunk; use glasses that are more vertical than 
horizontal (people tend to pour more into squat glasses) ; leave 
healthy foods in view, unhealthy ones out of view; leave serv­
ing bowls in the kitchen rather than on the table to discourage 
second helpings. 
^ EAT SLOWLY. Not just so you'll be more likely to know 
when to stop. I mean "slow" in the sense of deliberate and 
knowledgeable eating promoted by Slow Food, the Italian-born 
movement dedicated to the principle that "a firm defense of 
quiet material pleasure is the only way to oppose the universal 
folly of Fast Life." The organization, which was founded in re­
sponse to the arrival of American fast food in Rome during the 
1980s, seeks to reacquaint (or in some cases acquaint) people 
with the satisfactions of well-grown and well-prepared food 
enjoyed at leisurely communal meals. It sounds like an elitist 
club for foodies (which, alas, it sometimes can be), but at its NOT TOO MUCH: HOW TO EAT Ci 195 
most thoughtful, Slow Food offers a coherent protest against, 
and alternative to, the Western diet and way of eating, indeed 
to the whole ever-more-desperate Western way of life. Slow 
Food aims to elevate quality over quantity and believes that 
doing so depends on cultivating our sense of taste as well as 
rebuilding the relationships between producers and consum­
ers that the industrialization of our food has destroyed. "Food 
quality depends on consumers who respect the work of farm­
ers and are willing to educate their senses," Carlo Petrini, Slow 
Food's founder, has said. When that happens, "they become 
precious allies for producers." Even connoisseurship can have 
a politics, as when it deepens our appreciation for the work of 
the people who produce our food and ruins our taste for the 
superficial pleasures of fast food. 
It is no accident that Slow Food has its roots in Italy, a 
country much less enamored of the "folly of Fast Life" than 
the United States, and you have to wonder whether it's realistic 
to think the American way of eating can be reformed without 
also reforming the whole American way of life. Fast food is 
precisely the way you'd expect a people to eat who put success 
at the center of life, who work long hours (with two careers 
per household), get only a couple of weeks vacation each year, 
and who can't depend on a social safety net to cushion them 
from life's blows. But Slow Food's wager is that making time 
and slowing down to eat, an activity that happens three times 
a day and ramifies all through a culture, is precisely the wedge 
that can begin to crack the whole edifice. 
To eat slowly, in the Slow Food sense, is to eat with a fuller 
knowledge of all that is involved in bringing food out of the 196 « IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
earth and to the table. Undeniably, there are pleasures to be 
had eating that are based on the opposite—on knowing pre­
cious little; indeed, they sometimes depend on it.The fast-food 
hamburger has been brilliantly engineered to offer a succulent 
and tasty first bite, a bite that in fact would be impossible to 
enjoy if the eater could accurately picture the feedlot and the 
slaughterhouse and the workers behind it or knew anything 
about the "artificial grill flavor" that made that first bite so 
convincing.This is a hamburger to hurry through, no question. 
By comparison, eating a grass-fed burger when you can picture 
the green pastures in which the animal grazed is a pleasure 
of another order, not a simple one, to be sure, but one based 
on knowledge rather than ignorance and gratitude rather than 
indifference. 
To eat slowly, then, also means to eat deliberately, in the 
original sense of that word: "from freedom" instead of com­
pulsion. Many food cultures, particularly those at less of a re­
move from the land than ours, have rituals to encourage this 
sort of eating, such as offering a blessing over the food or 
saying grace before the meal. The point, it seems to me, is to 
make sure that we don't eat thoughtlessly or hurriedly, and 
that knowledge and gratitude will inflect our pleasure at the 
table. I don't ordinarily offer any special words before a meal, 
but I do sometimes recall a couple of sentences written by 
Wendell Berry, which do a good job of getting me to eat more 
deliberately: 
Eating with the fullest pleasure—pleasure, that is, 
that does not depend on ignorance—is perhaps the NOT TOO MUCH: HOW TO EAT «>> 197 
profoundest enactment of our connection with the 
world. In this pleasure we experience and celebrate 
our dependence and our gratitude, for we are living 
from mystery, from creatures we did not make and 
powers we cannot comprehend. 
Words such as these are one good way to foster a more 
deliberate kind of eating, but perhaps an even better way (as 
Berry himself has suggested) is for eaters to involve themselves 
in food production to whatever extent they can, even if that 
only means planting a few herbs on a sunny windowsill or 
foraging for edible greens and wild mushrooms in the park. If 
much of our carelessness in eating owes to the ease with which 
the industrial eater can simply forget all that is at stake, both for 
himself and for the world, then getting reacquainted with how 
food is grown and prepared can provide a useful reminder. So 
one last rule: 
«COOK AND, IF YOU CAN, PLANT A GARDEN. To 
take part in the intricate and endlessly interesting processes of 
providing for our sustenance is the surest way to escape the cul­
ture of fast food and the values implicit in it: that food should 
be fast, cheap, and easy; that food is a product of industry, not 
nature; that food is fuel, and not a form of communion, with 
other people as well as with other species—with nature. 
So far I am more at home in the garden than the kitchen, 
though I can appreciate how time spent in either place alters 
one's relationship to food and eating. The garden offers a great 
many solutions, practical as well as philosophical, to the whole 198 IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
problem of eating well. My own vegetable garden is modest 
in scale—a densely planted patch in the front yard only about 
twenty feet by ten—but it yields an astonishing cornucopia 
of produce, so much so that during the summer months we 
discontinue our CSA box and buy little but fruit from the farm­
ers' market. And though we live on a postage-stamp city lot, 
there's room enough for a couple of fruit trees too: a lemon, 
a fig, and a persimmon. To the problem of being able to af­
ford high-quality organic produce the garden offers the most 
straightforward solution: The food you grow yourself is fresher 
than any you can buy, and it costs nothing but an hour or two 
of work each week plus the price of a few packets of seed. 
The work of growing food contributes to your health long 
before you sit down to eat it, of course, but there is something 
particularly fitting about enlisting your body in its own suste­
nance. Much of what we call recreation or exercise consists of 
pointless physical labor, so it is especially satisfying when we 
can give that labor a point. But gardening consists of mental 
work as well: learning about the different varieties; figuring 
out which do best under the conditions of your garden; ac­
quainting yourself with the various microclimates—the subtle 
differences in light, moisture, and soil quality across even the 
tiniest patch of earth; and devising ways to outwit pests with­
out resorting to chemicals. None of this work is terribly diffi­
cult; much of it is endlessly gratifying, and never more so than 
in the hour immediately before dinner, when I take a knife and 
a basket out to the garden to harvest whatever has declared 
itself ripest and tastiest. 
Among other things, tending a garden reminds us of our NOT TOO MUCH: HOW TO EAT 199 
ancient evolutionary bargain with these ingenious domestic 
species—how cleverly they insinuate themselves into our lives, 
repaying the care and space we give them with the gift of good 
food. Each has its own way of announcing—through a change 
of color, shape, smell, texture, or taste—that the moment when 
it has the very most to offer us, when it is at its sweetest and 
most nourishing, has arrived: Pick me! 
Not that everything in the garden always works out so well; 
it doesn't, but there is a value in the inevitable failures too. 
Whenever your produce is anything less than gorgeous and de­
licious, gardening cultivates in you a deep respect for the skill 
of the farmer who knows how consistently to get it right. 
When the basket of produce lands on the kitchen counter, 
when we start in on the cleaning and cutting and chopping, 
we're thinking about a dozen different things—what to make, 
how to make it—but nutrition, or even health, is probably not 
high on the list. Look at this food. There are no ingredients la­
bels, no health claims, nothing to read except maybe a recipe. 
It's hard when contemplating such produce to think in terms 
of nutrients or chemical compounds; no, this is food, so fresh 
it's still alive, communicating with us by scent and color and 
taste. The good cook takes in all this sensory information and 
only then decides what to do with the basket of possibilities 
on the counter: what to combine it with; how, and how much, 
to "process" it. Now the culture of the kitchen takes over. That 
culture is embodied in those enduring traditions we call cui­
sines, any one of which contains more wisdom about diet and 
health than you will find in any nutrition journal or journal­
ism. The cook does not need to know, as the scientists have 200 O) IN DEFENSE OF FOOD 
recently informed us, that cooking the tomatoes with olive oil 
makes the lycopene in them more available to our bodies. No, 
the cook already knew that olive oil with tomatoes is a really 
good idea. 
As cook in your kitchen you enjoy an omniscience about 
your food that no amount of supermarket study or label read­
ing could hope to match. Having retaken control of the meal 
from the food scientists and processors, you know exactly what 
is and is not in it: There are no questions about high-fructose 
corn syrup, or ethoxylated diglycerides, or partially hydroge­
nated soy oil, for the simple reason that you didn't ethoxylate 
or partially hydrogenate anything, nor did you add any addi­
tives. (Unless, that is, you're the kind of cook who starts with 
a can of Campbell's cream of mushroom soup, in which case 
all bets are off.) To reclaim this much control over one's food, 
to take it back from industry and science, is no small thing; 
indeed, in our time cooking from scratch and growing any of 
your own food qualify as subversive acts. 
And what these acts subvert is nutritionism: the belief that 
food is foremost about nutrition and nutrition is so complex 
that only experts and industry can possibly supply it. When 
you're cooking with food as alive as this—these gorgeous and 
semigorgeous fruits and leaves and flesh—you're in no danger 
of mistaking it for a commodity, or a fuel, or a collection of 
chemical nutrients. No, in the eye of the cook or the gardener 
or the farmer who grew it, this food reveals itself for what it is: 
no mere thing but a web of relationships among a great many 
living beings, some of them human, some not, but each of 
them dependent on the other, and all of them ultimately rooted NOT TOO MUCH: HOW TO EAT 0> 201 
in soil and nourished by sunlight. I'm thinking of the relation­
ship between the plants and the soil, between the grower and 
the plants and animals he or she tends, between the cook and 
the growers who supply the ingredients, and between the cook 
and the people who will soon come to the table to enjoy the 
meal. It is a large community to nourish and be nourished 
by. The cook in the kitchen preparing a meal from plants and 
animals at the end of this shortest of food chains has a great 
many things to worry about, but "health" is simply not one of 
them, because it is given. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I've dedicated In Defense of Food to two editors, Ann Godoff and 
Gerry Marzorati, because the book would not exist without 
them. It began with an assignment from Gerry, who, over 
lunch one afternoon at a restaurant in Oakland, proposed that 
I learn all that I could about diet and health and then write an 
essay about it. When that essay was published in The New York 
Times Magazine a year ago, under the title "Unhappy Meals," Ann 
Godoff, my longtime book editor, telephoned to suggest the 
piece might hold the germ of a book—this book. I mention all 
this because I suspect many readers assume books spring full 
blown from the heads of writers, when in fact many of them 
spring, half baked, from the heads of brilliant editors. I'm un­
usually fortunate to have two of the very best ones deciding 
how I should spend my time. I'm doubly fortunate that Ann 
and Gerry also happen to be two of my dearest friends. Heart­
felt thanks to both of you. 
Ann and Gerry weren't the only editors who had a hand 
in this book, though the others don't wear the title or receive 
compensation for their labors (beyond this paragraph). As with 
every one of my books, Judith Belzer read the manuscript more 
times than anyone should have to and improved it in countless 
ways. I can no longer even imagine what it would be like to ACKNOWLEDGMENTS «» 203 
write a book without her as my first reader, and you can have 
no idea just how many lame sentences and lousy ideas she has 
kept out of print. As in the past, Mark Edmundson and Michael 
Schwarz also read the book in manuscript and made priceless 
suggestions; I couldn't have more supportive or stimulating 
colleagues. Thanks too to Jack Hitt, who's read all my books 
in galleys and helped me to figure out what I've written—not 
always so obvious. Christopher Gardner, a nutrition scientist at 
Stanford University School of Medicine, reviewed the manu­
script for scientific accuracy and rescued me from numerous 
errors of fact and interpretation; of course any that remain are 
mine alone. His own pioneering research in dietary patterns 
was also very helpful in developing my recommendations in 
part three. 
I owe an incalculable debt of gratitude to Adrienne Davich, 
a gifted journalist (and former student) who did a splendid 
and heroic job of researching the book and fact-checking the 
manuscript. Adrienne immersed herself in the medical litera­
ture, scoured the Berkeley library and databases for informa­
tion, and worked the phone confirming facts right up to press 
time. I don't exaggerate when I say this book might still not 
be finished if not for her zeal, intelligence, scrupulousness, 
judgment, and unfailing good humor in the face of a daunt­
ing deadline. I also want to thank my assistant Jaime Gross, for 
her indispensable help and constant good cheer, as well as my 
past and present students at the Graduate School of Journalism, 
who contribute more to my work than they probably realize. 
This book is in many ways a work of synthesis, built on 
a foundation of research and thinking laid by others. In edu-204 « ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
eating myself on the subject of food, health, and agriculture 
over the past several years, I've been fortunate to have four of 
the wisest and most generous teachers: Joan Gussow, Marion 
Nestle, Alice Waters, and Wendell Berry—you are abiding in­
spirations. For their insights and information in conversations 
and e-mail exchanges, I'm also pleased to be able to acknowl­
edge and thank: Susan Allport, Gyorgy Scrinis (coiner of the 
term nutritionism), Walter Willett, Joseph Hibbeln, Gladys Block, 
Geoffrey Cannon, Andrew Weil, Gary Nabhan, Bill Lands, David 
Ludwig, Jim Kaput, Alyson Mitchell, Brian Halweil, Bruce 
Ames, Martin Renner, and Kerin O'Dea. I hope I've done jus­
tice to your work. Much of what I know about agriculture and 
food systems I learned from Joel Salatin and George Naylor; 
and about eating well from Carlo Petrini, Angelo Garro, Dan 
Barber, everyone at Chez Panisse, and of course my mother, 
Corky Pollan. The growers in my own local food chain have 
also contributed much to my thinking about food and health: 
Thanks to Judith Redmond and everyone else at Full Belly Farm 
(my CSA), David Evans at Marin Sun Farms, and all the farmers 
at the Thursday farmers' market in Berkeley. 
Alex Star, my story editor at The New York Times Magazine, helped 
to focus my thinking in a series of conversations; his gentle but 
persistent prodding kept the project on track, and his incisive 
questions helped sharpen my arguments. I'm also grateful to 
the hundreds of readers who e-mailed me after the publication 
of both The Omnivores Dilemma and "Unhappy Meals," offering 
invaluable criticisms, leads, reading suggestions, and provoca­
tions; this book is much better for your contributions. 
At The Penguin Press, I get to work with not only the most ACKNOWLEDGMENTS <>> 205 
talented but also the nicest people in book publishing: Tracy 
Locke, Sarah Hutson, Liza Darnton, Lindsay Whalen, Maggie 
Si von, and Jacqueline Fischetti. Publishing a book is seldom 
thought of as a pleasant process, but at Penguin these days it 
actually almost is. I count on Amanda Urban, my literary agent 
for the past twenty years, for sage and completely unvarnished 
advice, and once again she delivered the goods. Binky is almost 
never wrong about anything. Though I would like to take this 
opportunity to remind her that, when I left New England for 
laid-back California, she predicted I would never complete an­
other book. Here's number two. 
I owe a debt to three very special institutions for making 
that possible and supporting the writing of this book: the 
Graduate School of Journalism at Berkeley, where I've taught 
since 2003 (thank you, Orville Schell and colleagues); the John 
S. and James L. Knight Foundation, which has supported my 
research since I came to Berkeley (thank you, Eric Newton); 
and Mesa Refuge, for lending me the cabin overlooking To-
males Bay where I wrote the first pages of this book under 
nearly ideal circumstances (thank you, Peter Barnes). 
Finally to Isaac, kitchen collaborator, supertaster, fast friend 
of the carbohydrate, thank you for all the wonderful ideas and 
suggestions, even for coining the word "cornography" to de­
scribe your father's work. The prize of you and your mother's 
company at the dinner table at the end of the day is what makes 
the writing possible. SOURCES 
Listed below, by section, are the principal works referred to in the 
text as well as others that supplied me with facts or contributed to 
my thinking. Web site URLs are current as of September 2007. All 
cited articles by me are available at www.michaelpollan.com. 
INTRODUCTION: AN EATER'S MANIFESTO 
Glassner, Barry. The Gospel of Food (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 
2007). 
Kantrowitz, Barbara, and Claudia Kalb. "Food News Blues." Newsweek 
(March 13, 2006). 
Kass, Leon. The Hungry Soul (New York: The Free Press, 1994). 
Mozaffarian, Dariush, and Eric B. Rimm. "Fish Intake, Contaminants, 
and Human Health: Evaluating the Risks and the Benefits." Journal 
of the American Medical Association. 296.15 (2006) : 1885-99. 
Nesheim, Maiden C, et al. "Seafood Choices: Balancing Benefits and 
Risks" (Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2006). 
Nestle, Marion. Food Politics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2002). 
Pollan, Michael. The Omnivores Dilemma (NewYork:The Penguin Press, 
2006). 
. "Our National Eating Disorder." New York Times Magazine, Oc­
tober 17, 2004. 
Prentice, Ross L. "Low-Fat Dietary Pattern and Risk of Invasive Breast 
Cancer: The Women's Health Initiative Randomized Controlled 
Dietary Modification Trial." Journal of the American Medical Association. 
295.6 (2006): 629-42. SOURCES 207 
Roberts, Paul. "The New Food Anxiety." Psychology Today (March/April, 
1998). 
Rozin, Paul. "The Selection of Foods by Rats, Humans, and Other 
Animals" in Advances in the Study of Behavior, Vol. 6. Edited by J. Rosen­
blatt, R. A. Hilde, C. Beer, and E. Shaw (NewYork: Academic Press, 
1976), pp. 21-76.The phrase "the omnivore s dilemma" is usually 
credited to Rozin, who studies the psychology of food choices. 
Scrinis, Gyorgy. "Sorry Marge." Meanjin. 61.4 (2002) : 108-16. Scrinis 
coined the term "nutritionism" in this illuminating article. 
Temple, Norman J., and Denis P. Burkitt. Western Diseases (New Jersey: 
Humana Press Inc., 1994). 
Trivedi, Bijal. "The Good, the Fad, and the Unhealthy." New Scientist 
(September 23, 2006). 
PART ONE : THE AGE OF NUTRITIONISM 
On the history of nutrition science and the evolution of dietary 
advice: 
Brock, William H. Justus von Liebig: The Chemical Gatekeeper (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1997). 
Cambridge World History of Food, The: Volume One, edited by Kenneth F. Kiple 
and Kriemhild Conee Ornelas (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2000). 
Ibid.: Volume Two, edited by Kenneth F. Kiple and Kriemhild Conee 
Ornelas (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000). 
Cannon, Geoffrey. The Fate of Nations: Food and Nutrition Policy in the New 
World. The Caroline Walker Lecture 2003, given at the Royal Soci­
ety (London: Caroline Walker Trust, 2003). Can be obtained on­
line at www.cwt.org.uk. 
. "Nutrition: The New World Map." Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 11 (2002): S480-S97. 
"Effect of Vitamin E and Beta Carotene on the Incidence of Lung 
Cancer and Other Cancers in Male Smokers, The. The Alpha-
Tocopherol, Beta Carotene Cancer Prevention Study Group." New 
England Journal of Medicine. 330.15 (1994): 1029-35. 208 « SOURCES 
Freudenheim, Jo L. "Study Design and Hypothesis Testing: Issues in 
the Evaluation of Evidence from Research in Nutritional Epidemi­
ology." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 69 ( 1999) : 1315S-21S. 
Glassner, Barry. The Gospel of Food (New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 
2007). 
Kantrowitz, Barbara, and Claudia Kalb. "Food News Blues." Newsweek 
(March 13, 2006). 
Levenstein, Harvey. Paradox of Plenty (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 2003). 
. Revolution at the Table: The Transformation of the American Diet (Berke­
ley: University of California Press, 2003). Includes an excellent 
account of food faddism in America. 
Melton, Lisa. "The Antioxidant Myth." New Scientist (August 5-11, 
2006). 
Planck, Nina. Real Food: What to Eat and Why (New York: Bloomsbury, 
2006). 
Scrinis, Gyorgy. "Sorry Marge." Meanjin. 61.4 (2002): 108-16. 
Shapiro, Laura. Perfection Salad: Women and Cooking at the Turn of the Century 
(NewYork: Random House, 2001). 
Taubes, Gary. Good Calories,Bad Calories (NewYork: Knopf, 2007). 
. "The Soft Science of Dietary Fat." Science. 291.30 (March 
2001). 
. "What if It's All Been a Big Fat Lie?" New York Times (July 7, 
2002). 
Trivedi, Bijal. "The Good, the Fad, and the Unhealthy." New Scientist 
(September 23, 2006). 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Surgeon General's 
Report on Nutrition and Health (Washington, D.C., 1988). 
U.S. Senate Select Committee on Nutrition and Human Needs. Dietary 
Goals for the United States (Washington, D.C., 1977). 
On the contemporary food environment and food marketing: 
Hartman, Harvey, and Jarrett Paschel. "Understanding Obesity: Prac­
tical Suggestions for the Obesity Crisis" (Bellevue: The Hartman SOURCES & 209 
Group, Inc., 2006). Interesting anthropological analysis of how 
American eating habits contribute to obesity. 
Lofstock, John. "Boosting Impulse Sales at the Checkout Counter." 
Convenience Store Decisions (January 11, 2006). 
Martin, Andrew. "Makers of Sodas Try a New Pitch: They're Healthy." 
New York Times (March 7, 2 0 0 7). 
Merill, Richard A., et al. "Like Mother Used to Make: An Analysis of 
FDA Standards of Identity." Columbia Law Review. 74.4 (May 1974). 
Contains a good account of the FDA's 1973 decision to repeal its 
imitation rule. 
Nestle, Marion. Food Politics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2002). 
. What to Eat (NewYork: North Point Press, 2006). 
Simon, Michèle. Appetite for Profit (New York: Nation Books, 2006). 
On the controversies surrounding modern nutrition science and its 
methods, the literature is endless. A good place to start appreciating 
the complexities, if not impossibilities, of the field is Marion Nesde's 
excellent epilogue to Food Politics. GaryTaubes offers a thorough critique 
of both epidemiological and clinical nutrition research in Good Calories, 
Bad Calories. For more on the methodology of nutrition science: 
Bélanger, CF., CH. Hennekens, B. Rosner et al. "The Nurses' Health 
Study." American Journal of Nursing. (1978): 1039-40. 
Campbell, T. Colin. "Letters to the Editor: Animal Protein and Isch­
emic Heart Disease." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 71.3 (2000) : 
849-50. 
Freudenheim, Jo L. "Study Design and Hypothesis Testing: Issues 
in the Evaluation of Evidence from Research in Nutritional Epi­
demiology." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 69 suppl (1999): 
1315S-21S. 
Giovannucci, Edward, et al. "A Comparison of Prospective and Retro­
spective Assessments of Diet in the Study of Breast Cancer." Ameri­
can Journal of Epidemiology. 137.5 (1993): 502-11. 
Horner, Neilann K. "Participant Characteristics Associated with Errors 210 SOURCES 
in Self-Reported Energy Intake from the Women's Health Initiative 
Food-Frequency Questionnaire." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
76 (2002): 766-73. 
Hu, Frank B., and Walter Willett. "Letters to the Editor: Reply to 
TC Campbell." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 71.3 (2000): 
850-51. 
Hu, Frank B., et al. "Reproducibility and Validity of Dietary Patterns 
Assessed with a Food-Frequency Questionnaire." American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition. 69 (1999): 243-49. 
Kristal, Alan R., et al. "Is It Time to Abandon the Food Frequency 
Questionnaire?" Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers Prevention. 14.12 
(2005): 2826-28. 
Liu, Simin, et al. "Fruit and Vegetable Intake and Risk of Cardiovas­
cular Disease: The Women's Health Study." American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 72 (2000): 922-28. 
Napoli, Maryann. "Prevention Advice to Women Doesn't Hold Up." 
Center for Medical Consumers Web site (March 2006). Available 
online at www.medicalconsumers.org. 
Ostrzenski, Adam, and Katarzyna M. Ostrzenska. "WHI Clinical Trial 
Revisit: Imprecise Scientific Methodology Disqualifies the Study's 
Outcomes." American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology. 193 (2005): 
1599-1604. 
Rosner, B., W C. Willett, et al. "Correction of Logistic Regression 
Relative Risk Estimates and Confidence Intervals for Systematic 
Within-Person Measurement Error." Statistics in Medicine. 8 (1989): 
1051-69. 
Stein, Karen. "After the Media Feeding Frenzy: Whither the Women's 
Health Initiative Dietary Modification Trial?" Journal of the American 
Dietetic Association. (2006): 794-800. 
Taubes, Gary. "Epidemiology Faces Its Limits." Science. 269.5221 
(1995): 164-69. 
. Good Calories, Bad Calories (NewYork: Knopf, 2007). 
Twombly, Renee. "Negative Women's Health Initiative Findings Stir 
Consternation, Debate Among Researchers." Journal of the National 
Cancer Institute. 98.8 (April 19, 2006). SOURCES « 211 
Willett, Walter C. "Invited Commentary: A Further Look at Dietary 
Questionnaire Validation." American Journal of Epidemiology. 154.12 
(2001): 1100-1102. 
, and Frank B. Hu. "Not the Time to Abandon the Food Fre­
quency Questionnaire: Point." Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers Preven­
tion. 15.10 (2006): 1757-58. 
On the subject of dietary fat and health: 
Beresford, Shirley A. "Low-Fat Dietary Pattern and Risk of Colorec­
tal Cancer: The Women's Health Initiative Randomized Controlled 
Dietary Modification Trial." Journal of the American Medical Association. 
295.6 (2006): 643-654. 
Dietary Fats and Health. Edited by E. G. Perkins and W J. Visek (Cham­
paign, IL: American Oil Chemists' Society, 1983). This book 
includes (from the Harshaw Chemical Company) Robert C. Hast-
ert's article "Hydrogénation—A Tool, Not an Epithet," on pages 
53-69. 
Enig, Mary G. Know Your Fats: The Complete Primer for Understanding the Nu­
trition of Fats, Oils, and Cholesterol (Silver Spring, MD: Bethesda Press, 
2000). Enig is hardly mainstream, but she was one of the first 
scientists to raise questions about the lipid hypothesis and sound 
the alarm about trans fats. 
, and Sally Fallon. "The Oiling of America" (The Weston A. Price 
Foundation, 2000). Available online at http://www.westonaprice 
.org/knowyourfats/ oiling.html. 
Howard, Barbara V, et al. "Low-Fat Dietary Pattern and Risk of Car­
diovascular Disease: The Women's Health Initiative Randomized 
Controlled Dietary Modification Trial." Journal of the American Medical 
Association. 295.6 (2006): 655-66. 
Hu, Frank B., et al. "Types of Dietary Fat and Risk of Coronary Heart 
Disease: A Critical Review." Journal of the American College of Nutrition. 
20.1 (2001): 5-19. 
Ludwig, David S. "Clinical Update: The Low-Glycemic-Index Diet." 
The Lancet. 369.9565 (2007): 890-92. 212 &> SOURCES 
Prentice, Ross L. "Low-Fat Dietary Pattern and Risk of Invasive Breast 
Cancer: The Women's Health Initiative Randomized Controlled 
Dietary Modification Trial." Journal of the American Medical Association. 
295.6 (2006): 629-42. 
Taubes, Gary. Good Calories, Bad Calories (New York: Knopf, 2007). 
Taubes's reporting on and analysis of the lipid hypothesis is 
groundbreaking. 
. "The Soft Science of Dietary Fat." Science. 291.30 (March 
2001). 
. "What if It's All Been a Big Fat Lie?" New York Times Magazine 
(July 7, 2002). This article almost single-handedly launched the 
second Atkins craze and the great carbophobia of 2002-2003. 
On the links between diet and diseases: 
Campbell, T. Colin, and Thomas M. Campbell II. The China Study (Dal­
las: BenBella Books, Inc., 2006). 
Ford, Earl S., et al. "Explaining the Decrease in U.S. Deaths from Cor­
onary Disease, 1980-2000." New England Journal of Medicine. 356.23 
(2007): 2388-98. 
Key, Timothy J., et al. "Diet, Nutrition and the Prevention of Cancer." 
Public Health Nutrition. 7.1A (2004): 187-200. 
National Research Council. Diet, Nutrition and Cancer (Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press, 1982). 
Nestle, Marion. Food Politics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2002). 
Nutritional Genomics: Discovering the Path to Personalized Nutrition. Edited by 
Jim Kaput and Raymond L. Rodriguez (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc., 2006). This volume includes Walter Willett's article 
"The Pursuit of Optimal Diets: A Progress Report." 
Nutritional Health: Strategies for Disease Prevention. Edited by Ted Wilson and 
Norman J.Temple (Totowa, NJ: Humana Press, Inc., 2001). 
Rosamond, Wayne D, et al. "Trends in the Incidence of Myocardial 
Infarction and in Mortality Due to Coronary Heart Disease, 1987 
to 1994." New England Journal of Medicine. 339.13 (1998): 861-67. SOURCES 213 
Willett, Walter C. "Diet and Cancer: One View at the Start of the 
Millennium." Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention. 10 (2001): 
3-8. 
. "Diet and Health: What Should We Eat?" Science. 264.5158 
(1994): 532-37. 
. Eat, Drink, and Be Healthy: The Harvard Medical School Guide to Healthy 
Eating (NewYork: Free Press, 2001). 
World Cancer Research Fund. Food, Nutrition and the Prevention of Cancer: A 
Global Perspective. (Washington, DC: American Institute for Cancer 
Research, 1997). 
On nutritionism and its social and psychological effects: 
Roberts, Paul. "The New Food Anxiety." Psychology Today. (March/April, 
1998). 
Rozin, Paul, et al. "Food and Life, Pleasure and Worry, Among 
American College Students: Gender Differences and Regional 
Similarities." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 85.1 (2003): 
132-41. 
Rozin, Paul. "Human Food Intake and Choice: Biological, Psycholog­
ical and Cultural Perspectives." (Philadelphia: University of Penn­
sylvania, 2002). Available online at http://www.danone-institute. 
• com/publications/book/pdf/food selection 01 rozin.pdf. 
Rozin, Paul, et al. "Lay American Conceptions of Nutrition: Dose 
Insensitivity, Categorical Thinking, Contagion, and the Monotonie 
Mind." Health Psychology. 15.6 (1996): 438-47. 
Rozin, Paul, et al. "The Ecology of Eating: Smaller Portion Sizes in 
France Than in the United States Help Explain the French Para­
dox." Psychological Science. 14.5 (2003): 450-54. 
Scrinis, Gyorgy, and Rosemary Stanton. "A Diet Thin on Science." The 
Age (August 29, 2005). 
Scrinis, Gyorgy. "Engineering the Food Chain." Arena Magazine. 77 
(2005): 37-39. 
. "High in Protein, Low in Fat and Too Good to Be True." 
Sydney Morning Herald (April 7, 2006). 214 0> SOURCES 
. "Labels: An Unhealthy Trend." The Age (December 30, 
2005). 
. "Sorry Marge." Meonjin. 61.4 (2002): 108-16. 
PART TWO: THE WESTERN DIET AND THE DISEASES OF 
CIVILIZATION 
On the Western diet and its links to the Western diseases: 
Diamond, Jared. Guns, Germs,and Steel (NewYork: WW Norton & Com­
pany, 1999). 
Diet of Man: Needs and Wants. Edited by John Yudkin (London: Applied 
Science Publishers Ltd., 1978). 
Drummond, J.C., and Anne Wilbraham. The Englishman's Food: A History of 
Five Centuries of English Diet (Oxford: Alden Press, 1939). 
Milburn, Michael P. "Indigenous Nutrition." American Indian Quarterly. 
28.3 (2004): 411-34. 
Nabhan, Gary Paul. Why Some Like It Hot: Food, Genes, and Cultural Diversity 
(Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2004). 
Northbourne, Christopher James (5 th Lord Northbourne). Look to the 
Land (London: J. M. Dent & Sons, 1940). New edition: (Hillsdale, 
NY: Sophia Perennis, 2003). 
O'Dea, Kerin. "Marked Improvement in Carbohydrate and Lipid Me­
tabolism in Diabetic Australian Aborigines After Temporary Rever­
sion to Traditional Lifestyle." Diabetes. 33 (1984): 596-603. This 
is the research referred to at the beginning of Part II. It is further 
elaborated on in: 
. "The Therapeutic and Preventive Potential of the Hunter-
Gatherer Lifestyle: Insights from Australian Aborigines." From 
Western Diseases. Edited by N. J.Temple and D. P. Burkitt (Totowa, NJ: 
Humana Press, 1994). 
Perry, George H., et al. "Diet and the Evolution of Human Amy­
lase Gene Copy Number Variation." Nature Genetics. doi:10.1038/ 
ng2123 (September 9, 2007). SOURCES Oi 215 
Price, Weston A. Nutrition and Physical Degeneration, 7th edition (LaMesa: 
Price-Pottenger Nutrition Foundation, Inc., 2006). 
Renner, Martin. "Modern Civilization, Nutritional Dark Age: Weston 
A. Price's Ecological Critique of the Industrial Food System" (UC 
Santa Cruz master's thesis, 2005). 
Schmid, Ronald F. Traditional Foods Are Your Best Medicine: Improving Health 
and Longevity with Native Nutrition (Rochester, NY: Healing Arts Press, 
1987). 
Taubes, Gary. Good Calories, Bad Calories (New York: Knopf, 2007). See 
Chapter 5, "The Diseases of Civilization." 
Western Diseases. Edited by Norman J. Temple and Denis P. Burkitt 
(Totowa, NJ: Humana Press Inc., 1994). 
On the industrialization of agriculture and the links between soil 
and health: 
Asami, Danny K., et al. "Comparison of the Total Phenolic and 
Ascorbic Acid Content of Free-Dried and Air-Dried Marionberry, 
Strawberry, and Corn Using Conventional, Organic, and Sustain­
able Agricultural Practices." Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry. 51 
(2003): 1237-41. 
Benbrook, Charles M. "Elevating Antioxidant Levels in Food Through 
Organic Farming and Food Processing: An Organic Center State of 
Science Review" (Foster, RI: Organic Center, 2005). 
Berry, Wendell. The Unsettling of America: Culture and Agriculture (San Fran­
cisco: Sierra Club Books, 1977). 
Brandt, Kirsten, and Jens Peter Molgaard. "Organic Agriculture: Does 
It Enhance or Reduce the Nutritional Value of Plant Foods?" Journal 
of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 81.9 (2001 ) : 924-31. 
Carbonaro, Marina, and Maria Mattera. "Polyphenoloxidase Activity 
and Polyphenol Levels in Organically and Conventionally Grown 
Peaches." Food Chemistry. 72 (2001 ) : 419-24. 
Davis, Donald R., et al. "Changes in USDA Food Composition Data 
for 43 Garden Crops, 1950 to 1999." Journal of the American College of 
Nutrition. 23.6 (2004): 669-82. 216 « SOURCES 
. "Trade-Offs in Agriculture and Nutrition." Food Technology. 
59.3 (2005). 
Fox, Jennifer E., et al. "Pesticides Reduce Symbiotic Efficiency of 
Nitrogen-Fixing Rhizobia and Host Plants." Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences. 104.24 (2007). 
Garvin, David R, Ross M. Welch, and John W Finley. "Historical Shifts 
in the Seed Mineral Micronutrient Concentration of US Hard Red 
Winter Wheat Germplasm." Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture. 
86 (2006): 2213-20. 
Halweil, Brian. "Still No Free Lunch: Nutrient Content of U.S. Food 
Supply Suffers at Hands of High Yields" (Foster, RI: Organic Cen­
ter, 2007). An excellent survey of the literature. 
Harvey, Graham. The Forgiveness of Nature.The Story of Grass (London: Jona­
than Cape/Random House, 2001). 
Howard, Sir Albert. An Agricultural Testament (New York: Oxford Univer­
sity Press, 1943). 
. The Soil and Health (Lexington, KY:The University of Kentucky 
Press, 2006). 
Manning, Richard. Against the Grain (NewYork: North Point Press, 2004). 
Mayer, Anne-Marie. "Historical Changes in the Mineral Content of 
Fruits and vegetables." British Food Journal. 99.6 (1997): 207-11. 
Mitchell, Alyson E., et al. "Ten-Year Comparison of the Influences 
of Organic and Conventional Crop Management Practices on the 
Content of Flavonoids in Tomatoes." Journal of Food and Agricultural 
Chemistry (published online June 23, 2007). 
Murphy, K., et al. "Relationship Between Yield and Mineral Nutrient 
Content in Historical and Modern Spring Wheat Cultivars." Plant 
Genetic Resources (in press). 
Pollan, Michael. The Botany of Desire: A Plants-Eye View of the World (New 
York: Random House, 2001). 
. The Omnivores Dilemma:A Natural History of Four Meals (NewYork: 
Penguin Press, 2006). 
Ryan, M.H., et al. "Grain Mineral Concentrations and Yield of Wheat 
Grown Under Organic and Conventional Management." Journal of 
the Science of Food and Agriculture. 84 (2004) : 207-16. SOURCES 0> 217 
Schmid, Ronald. The Untold Story of Milk (Washington, D.C.: New Trends 
Publishing Inc., 2007). 
Voisin, André. Soil, Gross and Cancer (Austin: Acres U.S.A., Publishers, 
1999). 
White, P.J., and M. R. Broadley. "Historical Variation in the Mineral 
Composition of Edible Horticultural Products." Journal of Horticul­
tural Science & Biotechnology. 80.6 (2005): 660-67. 
For statistical information on twentieth-century changes in the 
American food supply and diet: 
U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). FAOSTAT Statistical 
Database: "Agriculture/Production/Core Production Data." Ac­
cessed online at http://faostat.fao.org. 
USDA Economic Research Service. "Major Trends in U.S. Food Supply, 
1909-99." FoodReview. 23.1 (2000). 
. "U.S. Food Supply Providing More Food and Calories." 
FoodReview. 22.3 (1999). 
. "U.S. per Capita Food Supply Trends: More Calories, Refined 
Carbohydrates, and Fats." FoodReview. 25.3 (2002). 
On the health implications of various dietary patterns (as opposed 
to individual nutrients) : 
Ames, Bruce N. "Increasing Longevity by Tuning Up Metabolism." 
European Molecular Biology Organization. 6 (2005): S20—S24. More of 
Ames' research on micronutrient deficiencies is available at his 
Web site: www.bruceames.org. 
. "Low Micronutrient Intake May Accelerate the Degenerative 
Diseases of Aging Through Allocation of Scarce Micronutrients by 
Triage." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 103.47 (2006): 
17589-94. 
Appel, Lawrence J. "A Clinical Trial of the Effects of Dietary Patterns 
on Blood Pressure." New England Journal of Medicine. 336.16 (1997): 
1117-24. 218 SOURCES 
de Lorgeril, Michel. "Mediterranean Diet, Traditional Risk Factors, 
and the Rate of Cardiovascular Complications After Myocardial 
Infarction: Final Report of the Lyon Diet Heart Study." Journal of the 
American Heart Association. 99 (1999): 779-85. 
Jacobs, David R., et al. "Nutrients, Foods, and Dietary Patterns as 
Exposures in Research: A Framework for Food Synergy." American 
Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 78 suppl (2003): 508S-13S. This is the 
study on whole grains discussed in the section. 
Liu, Simin, et al. "Fruit and Vegetable Intake and Risk of Cardiovas­
cular Disease: The Women's Health Study." American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 72 (2000): 922-28. 
Planck, Nina. Real Food:What to Eat and Why (New York: Bloomsbury, 
2006). 
Weil, Andrew. Healthy Aging: A Lifelong Guide to Your Physical and Spiritual Weil-
Being (NewYork: Knopf, 2005). 
On the rise of modern processed foods: 
Drummond, J.C. The Englishman's Food: A History of Five Centuries of English 
Diet (Oxford: Alden Press, 1939). 
Levenstein, Harvey. Paradox of Plenty: A Social History of Eating in Modern 
America (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003). 
. Revolution at the Table: The Transformation of the American Diet (Berke­
ley: University of California Press, 2003). 
Perren, Richard. "Structural Change and Market Growth in the Food 
Industry: Flour Milling in Britain, Europe, and America, 1850-
1914." Economic History Review. 43.3 (1990): 420-37. 
Shapiro, Laura. Perfection Salad: Women and Cooking at the Turn of the Century 
(NewYork: Random House, 2001). 
. Something from the Oven: Reinventing Dinner in 1950s America (New 
York: Penguin, 2005). 
Tannahill, Reay. Food in History (NewYork: Stein and Day, 1973). 
Tisdale, Sally. The Best Thing I Ever Tasted:The Secret of Food (New York: Riv-
erhead, 2001). SOURCES « 219 
On omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids: 
Allport, Susan. The Queen of Fats: Why 0mega-3sWere Removed from the Western 
Diet and What We Can Do to Replace Them (Berkeley: University of Cali­
fornia Press, 2006). By far the best work of science journalism on 
the subject. 
. "The Skinny on Fat." Gastronomica—The Journal of Food and Culture. 
3.1 (2003): 28-36. 
Carlson, Susan E., and Martha Neuringer. "Polyunsaturated Fatty Acid 
and Neurodevelopment: A Summary and Critical Analysis of the 
Literature." Lipids. 34.2 (1999): 171-78. 
Hibbeln, J.R., et al. "Dietary Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids and Depres­
sion: When Cholesterol Doesn't Satisfy." American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 62 (1995): 1-9. 
, et al. "Healthy Intakes of n-3 and n-6 Fatty Acids: Estima­
tions Considering Worldwide Diversity." American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 83 (2006). 
, et al. "Increasing Homicide Rates and Linoleic Acid Con­
sumption Among Five Western Countries, 1961-2000." Lipids. 
39.12 (2004). 
Holman, RalphT. "The Slow Discovery of the Importance of Omega-
3 Fatty Acids in Human Health." Presented as part of a sympo­
sium, "Evolution of Ideas About the Nutritional Value of Dietary 
Fat," at the Experimental Biology 97 meeting, April 9, 1997.The 
proceedings were published by the American Society for Nutri­
tional Sciences in 1998. 
Kris-Etherton, PM., et al. "Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids in the Food 
Chain in the United States." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 71 
(2000): 179S-88S. 
Mozaffarian, Dariush, and Eric B. Rimm. "Fish Intake, Contaminants, 
and Human Health: Evaluating the Risks and the Benefits." Journal 
of the American Medical Association. 296.15 (2006): 1885-99. 
Nesheim, Maiden C, et al. "Seafood Choices: Balancing Benefits and 
Risks" (Washington D.C.: National Academies Press, 2006). 
Pischon, Tobias, et al. "Habitual Dietary Intake of n-3 and n-6 Fatty 220 « SOURCES 
Acids in Relation to Inflammatory Markers Among US Men and 
Women." Circulation. 108 (2003): 155-60. 
Simopoulos, Artemis P., and Jo Robinson. The Omega Diet:The Lifesav-
ing Nutritional Program Based on the Diet of the Island of Crete (New York: 
HarperCollins, 1998). 
Uauy, Ricardo, et al. "Essential Fatty Acids in Visual and Brain Devel­
opment." Lipids. 36.9 (2001): 885-95. 
On the rising incidence of type 2 diabetes and its impact: 
Boyle, James P., et al. "Projection of Diabetes Burden Through 2050: 
Impact of Changing Demography and Disease Prevalence in the 
U.S." Diabetes Care. 24 (2001): 1936-40. 
Gregg, Edward W, et al. "Trends in the Prevalence and Ratio of Di­
agnosed to Undiagnosed Diabetes According to Obesity Levels in 
the U.S." Diabetes Care. 27 (2004): 2806-12. 
Haslam, David W, and W Philip T. James. "Obesity." The Lancet. 336 
(2005): 1197—1209. 
Kleinfield, N.R. "Diabetes and Its Awful Toll Quietly Emerge as a Cri­
sis." The New York Times (January 9, 2006). 
. "Living at an Epicenter of Diabetes, Defiance and Despair." 
New York Times (January 10,2006). 
Narayan, K. M. Venkat, et al. "Lifetime Risk for Diabetes Mellitus in 
the United States." Journal of the American Medical Association. 290.14 
(2003): 1884-90. 
O'Connor, Andrew S., and Jeffrey R. Schelling. "Diabetes and the Kid­
ney." American Journal of Kidney Diseases. 46.4 (2005): 766-73. 
Olshansky, S. Jay, et al. "A Potential Decline in Life Expectancy in the 
United States in the 21st Century." New England Journal of Medicine. 
352.1 1 (2005): 1138-45. 
Poinasamy, Darren. "Facing Up to the Diabetes Threat in the US." 
Business Briefing: US Pharmacy Review. (2004) : 48-50. 
Urbina, Ian. "In the Treatment of Diabetes, Success Often Does Not 
Pay." New York Times (January 11, 2006). SOURCES <©> 221 
Wild, Sarah, et al. "Global Prevalence of Diabetes: Estimates for the 
Year 2000 and Projections for 2030." Diabetes Care. 27.5 (2004): 
1047-53. 
PART THREE: GETTING OVER NUTRITIONISM 
1. Eat Food: On the benefits of whole foods and traditional diets: 
Allport, Susan. The Primal Feast: Food, Sex, Foraging, and Love (Lincoln, NB: 
iUniverse Inc., 2000). 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. Edited by Marion Nestle, et al. 61 
suppl (1995): 1313-20. This special supplement edition looked 
at the benefits of the Mediterranean diet. 
Appel, Lawrence J. "A Clinical Trial of the Effects of Dietary Patterns 
on Blood Pressure." New England Journal of Medicine. 336.16 (1997): 
1117-24. 
Brown, Melody J., et al. "Carotenoid Bioavailability Is Higher from 
Salads Ingested with Full-Fat Than with Fat-Reduced Salad Dress­
ings as Measured with Electrochemical Detection." American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition. 80 (2004): 396-403. 
de Lorgeril, Michel. "Mediterranean Diet, Traditional Risk Factors, 
and the Rate of Cardiovascular Complications After Myocardial 
Infarction: Final Report of the Lyon Diet Heart Study." Journal of the 
American Heart Association. 99 (1999): 779-85. 
Feenstra, Gail. "The Roles of Farmers' Markets in Fueling Local Econ­
omies." Gastronomic Sciences. 1 (2007). 
Fielding, Jeanette M., and Kerin O' Dea, et al. "Increases in Plasma 
Lycopene Concentration After Consumption of Tomatoes Cooked 
with Olive Oil." Asia Pacific Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 14.2 (2005): 
131-36. 
Gussow, Joan Dye. "Why You Should Eat Food, and Other Nutritional 
Heresies." Speech, University of California, Davis, Plant & Envi­
ronmental Sciences. November 7, 2003. 
Hu, Frank B., et al. "Prospective Study of Major Dietary Patterns and 222 *» SOURCES 
Risk of Coronary Heart Disease in Men." American Journal of Clinical 
Nutrition. 72 (2002): 912-21. 
Johnston, Francis E. "Food and Biocultural Evolution: A Model for the 
Investigation of Modern Nutritional Problems." Nutritional Anthro­
pology (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania, 1987). 
Kouris-Blazos, Antigone, et al. "Are the Advantages of the Mediter­
ranean Diet Transferable to Other Populations? A Cohort Study 
in Melbourne, Australia." British Journal of Nutrition. 82 (1999): 
57-61. 
Milburn, Michael P. "Indigenous Nutrition." American Indian Quarterly. 
28.3 (2004): 411-34. 
Nabhan, Gary Paul. Why Some Like It Hot: Food, Genes, and Cultural Diversity 
(Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2004). 
Nesde, Marion. What to Eat (NewYork: North Point Press, 2006). 
Planck, Nina. Real Food: What to Eat and Why (New York: Bloomsbury, 
2006). 
Sherman, PaulW, and Jennifer Billing. "Darwinian Gastronomy: Why 
We Use Spices." Bioscience. 49.6 (1999): 453-63. 
Simopoulos, Artemis P. "The Mediterranean Diets: What Is So Special 
About the Diet of Greece? The Scientific Evidence." Journal of Nu­
trition. (American Institute for Cancer Research 11 th Annual Re­
search Conference on Diet, Nutrition and Cancer, Washington, 
D.C., July 16-17, 2001): 3065S-73S. 
, and Jo Robinson. The Omega Diet: The Lifesaving Nutritional Pro­
gram Based on the Diet of the Island of Crete (New York: HarperCollins, 
1998). 
Trichopoulou, A., and E. Vasilopoulou. "Mediterranean Diet 
and Longevity." British Journal of Nutrition. 84 suppl. 2 (2000): 
S205-S9. 
Unlu, Nuray Z., et al. "Carotenoid Absorption from Salad and Salsa 
by Humans Is Enhanced by the Addition of Avocado or Avocado 
Oil." Journal of Nutrition. 135 (2005): 431-36. 
van het Hof, Karin H., et al. "Dietary Factors That Affect the Bioavail­
ability of Carotenoids." Journal of Nutrition. 130 (2000): 503-6. SOURCES Oi 223 
Willett, Walter C. "Diet and Health: What Should We Eat?" Science. 
264.5158 (1994): 532-37. 
On processed foods and health claims: 
Barrionuevo, Alexei. "Globalization in Every Loaf." New York Times (June 
16, 2007). A good account of Sara Lee's whole-grain white bread. 
See also: www.thejoyofeating.com/. 
Erdman, John W, et al. "Not All Soy Products Are Created Equal: 
Caution Needed in Interpretation of Research Results" (Fifth 
International Symposium on the Role of Soy in Preventing and 
Treating Chronic Disease, American Society for Nutrition Sciences, 
2004). 
Holvoet, Paul, et al. "Circulating Oxidized LDL Is a Useful Marker for 
Identifying Patients with Coronary Artery Disease." Arteriosclerosis, 
Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology. 21 (2001): 844-48. 
Hur, S.J., et al. "Formation of Cholesterol Oxidation Products (COPs) 
in animal products." Food Control. 18 (2007): 939-47. 
Lesser, L.I., D.S. Ludwig, et al. "Relationship Between Funding Source 
and Conclusion Among Nutrition-Related Scientific Articles." Pub­
lic Library of Science. 4.1, e5 doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0040005 
(2007). 
Martin, Andrew. "Makers of Sodas Try a New Pitch: They're Healthy." 
New York Times (March 7, 2007). 
Messina, Mark J. "Legumes and Soybeans: Overview of Their Nutri­
tional Profiles and Health Effects." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 
70 (1999):439S-50S. 
Pie, Jae Eun, et al. "Evaluation of Oxidative Degradation of Choles­
terol in Food and Food Ingredients: Identification and Quantifica­
tion of Cholesterol Oxides." Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry. 38 
(1990): 973-79. 
Ravn, Karen. "Corn Oil's 'Qualified Health Claim' Raises Eyebrows." 
Los Angeles Times (April 16,2007). 
Staprans, Ilona, et al. "The Role of Dietary Oxidized Cholesterol and 224 Oi SOURCES 
Oxidized Fatty Acids in the Development of Atherosclerosis." Mo­
lecular Nutrition and Food Research. 49 (2005): 1075-82. 
Tenbergen, Klaus. "Dough and Bread Conditioners." Food Product Design— 
Culinary Connection. Accessed online August 1, 2007 at http://www 
.foodproductdesign.com/archive/1999/1199cc.html. 
U.S. FDA. Qualified Health Claims: Letter of Enforcement Discre­
tion—Corn Oil and Oil-Containing Products and a Reduced Risk 
of Heart Disease (Docket No. 2006P-0243). Accessed online July 
21, 2007 at http://wwwcfsan.fda.gov/~dms/qhccorno.html. 
U.S. FDA. Letter responding to health claim petition dated August 28, 
2003: Monounsaturated Fatty Acids from Olive Oil and Coronary 
Heart Disease (Docket No. 2003Q-0559). Accessed online July 
21, 2007 at http://www^.cfsan.fda.gov/~dms/qhcolive.html. 
Warner, Melanie. "Science's Quest to Banish Fat in Tasty Ways." New 
York Times (August 11, 2005). 
2. Mostly Plants: On plant-based diets and meat eating: 
Appel, Lawrence J. "A Clinical Trial of the Effects of Dietary Patterns 
on Blood Pressure." New England Journal of Medicine. 336.16 (1997): 
1117-24. 
Campbell, T. Colin, and Thomas M. Campbell II. The China Study (Dal­
las: BenBella Books, Inc., 2006). 
Cho, Eunyoung, Sc.D, et al. "Red Meat Intake and Risk of Breast 
Cancer Among Postmenopausal Women." Archives of Internal Medicine. 
166 (2006): 2253-59. 
Gardner, Christopher D. "The Effect of a Plant-Based Diet on Plasma 
Lipids in Hypercholesterolemic Adults." Annals of Internal Medicine. 
142 (2005): 725-33. 
Greene, Kelly. "Aging Well: How to Eat Meat and Still Feel as Healthy 
as a Vegetarian." Wall Street Journal (October 21, 2006). 
Heber, David. What Color Is Your Diet? (New York: ReganBooks, 2001). 
Excellent discussion of antioxidants and the benefits of a plant-
based diet. 
Hu, Frank B., et al. "Frequent Nut Consumption and Risk of Coro-SOURCES *» 225 
nary Heart Disease in Women: Prospective Cohort Study." British 
Medical Journal. 317 (1998): 1341-45. 
Hu, Frank B. "Plant-Based Foods and Prevention of Cardiovascular 
Disease: An Overview. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 78 suppl 
(2003): 544S-51S. 
Jacobs, David R., and Lyn M. Steffen. "Nutrients, Foods, and Dietary 
Patterns as Exposures in Research: A Framework for Food Syn­
ergy." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 78.3 (2003): 508S-13S. 
Jacobson, Michael R, and the staff of the Center for Science in the 
Public Interest. Six Arguments for a Greener Diet: How a More Plant-Based Diet 
Could Save Your Health and the Environment (Washington, DC: Center for 
Science in the Public Interest, 2006). 
Key, Timothy J. A., et al. "Dietary Habits and Mortality in 11,000 
Vegetarians and Health Conscious People: Results of a 17-Year 
Follow-up." British Medical Journal. 313 (1996): 775-79. 
Key, Timothy J., et al. "Health Effects of Vegetarian and Vegan Diets." 
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society. 65 (2006): 35-41. 
Leitzmann, Claus. "Nutrition Ecology: The Contribution of Vegetar­
ian Diets." American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 78 suppl (2003): 
657S-59S. 
Newby, P.K., et al. "Risk of Overweight and Obesity Among Semi-
vegetarian, Lactovegetarian, and Vegan Women." American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition. 81 (2005): 1267-74. 
Steinfeld, Henning, et al. Livestocks Long Shadow: Environmental Issues and 
Options. A report published by the Food and Agriculture Organiza­
tion of the United Nations (Rome: FAO, 2006). Available online 
at http://www.virtualcentre.org/en/library/key pub/longshad/ 
A0701E00.htm. 
Willett, Walter C. "Diet and Health: What Should We Eat?" Science. 
264.5158 (1994): 532-37. 
3. Not Too Much: On Eating habits, food culture, and health 
Berry, Wendell. "The Pleasures of Eating," in What Are People For? (New 
York: North Point Press, 1990). 226 Oi SOURCES 
. "The Reactor and the Garden," in The Gift of Good Land (San 
Francisco: North Point Press, 1981). On the political significance 
of gardening. 
Brillat-Savarin, Jean-Anthelme. The Physiology of Taste. Translated by Anne 
Drayton (London: Penguin, 1994). 
Cutler, David M., et al. "Why Have Americans Become More Obese?" 
Journal of Economic Perspectives. 17.3 (2003): 93-118. 
Geier, Andrew B., and Paul Rozin, et al. "Unit Bias: A New Heuristic 
That Helps Explain the Effect of Portion Size on Food Intake." 
Psychological Science. 17.6 (2006): 521-25. 
Hartman, Harvey, and Jarrett Paschel. "Understanding Obesity: Prac­
tical Suggestions for the Obesity Crisis" (Bellevue, WA: The Hart­
man Group, Inc., 2006). 
Katz, Sandor Ellix. The Revolution Will Not Be Microwaved (White River 
Junction, VT: Chelsea Green, 2007). 
Montanari, Massimo. Food Is Culture (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2006). 
Petrini, Carlo. Slow Food Nation (New York: Rizzoli Ex Libris, 2007). 
For more on the Slow Food movement, see its Web site: www 
.Slowfood.com. 
. "Terra Madre Opening Speech." Turin, Italy. October 20, 
2004. 
Pollan, Michael. "Cruising on the Ark of Taste." Mother Jones (May, 
2003). 
Rozin, Paul, et al. "The Ecology of Eating: Smaller Portion Sizes in 
France Than in the United States Help Explain the French Para­
dox." Psychological Science. 14.5 (2003): 450-54. 
, et al. "Food and Life, Pleasure and Worry, Among Ameri­
can College Students: Gender Differences and Regional Simi­
larities." Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 85.1 (2003): 
132-41. 
Wansink, Brian. Mindless Eating.WhyWe Eat More Than We Think (New York: 
Bantam Books, 2006). SOURCES « 227 
On calorie restriction: 
Civitarese, Anthony E. "Calorie Restriction Increases Muscle Mito­
chondrial Biogenesis in Healthy Humans." Public Library of Science. 
4.3 (2007): 0485-94. 
"Eat Your Cake and Have It" (New York: Nature Publishing Group, 
2006). 
Fontana, Luigi. "Excessive Adiposity, Calorie Restriction, and Aging." 
Journal of the American Medical Association. 295.13 (2006): 1577-78. 
Heilbronn, Leonie K., et al. "Effect of 6-Month Calorie Restriction 
on Biomarkers of Longevity, Metabolic Adaptation, and Oxidative 
Stress in Overweight Individuals." Journal of the American Medical As­
sociation. 295.13 (2006): 1539-48. 
Meyer,Timothy E., et al. "Long-Term Caloric Restriction Ameliorates 
the Decline in Diastolic Function in Humans." Journal of the American 
College of Cardiology. 47.2 (2006): 398-402. 
Seligman, Katherine. "Iron Will." San Francisco Chronicle (September 2, 
2007). 
On drinking and the French paradox: 
Criqui, M.H., and Brenda L. Ringel. "Does Diet or Alcohol Explain the 
French Paradox?" The Lancet. 344 (1994): 8939-40. 
Drewnowski, Adam, et al. "Diet Quality and Dietary Diversity in 
France: Implications for the French Paradox." Journal of the American 
Dietetic Association. 96.7 (1996): 663-69. 
Ferrieres, Jean. "The French Paradox: Lessons for Other Countries." 
Heart. 90 (2004): 107-11. 
Fuchs, Flavio D. "Vascular Effects of Alcoholic Beverages: Is It Only 
Alcohol That Matters?" Hypertension. 45 (2005): 851-52. 
Mukamal, Kenneth J., et al. "Roles of Drinking Pattern and Type of 
Alcohol Consumed in Coronary Heart Disease in Men." New England 
journal of Medicine. 348.2 (2003): 109-18. 
Opie, Lionel H., and Sandrine Lecour. "The Red Wine Hypothesis: 228 *>> SOURCES 
From Concepts to Protective Signalling Molecules." European Heart 
Journal. 28 (2007): 1683-93. 
Renaud, S., and M. de Lorgeril. "Wine, Alcohol, Platelets, and the 
French Paradox for Coronary Heart Disease." The Lancet. 339.8808 
(1992): 1523-26. 
Rimm, E. "Commentary: Alcohol and Coronary Heart Disease—Lay­
ing the Foundation for Future Work." International Journal of Epidemiol­
ogy. 30 (2001): 738-39. 
Volatier, Jean-Luc, and Philippe verger. "Recent National French Food 
and Nutrient Intake Data." British Journal of Nutrition. 81.S2 (1999): 
57-59. 
Zuger, Abigail. "The Case for Drinking (All Together Now: In Mod­
eration!)." New York Times (December 31, 2002). 
. "How a Tonic Keeps the Parts Well Oiled." NewYork Times (De­
cember 31, 2002). RESOURCES 
A selection of resources for finding real food and eating locally: 
PRINT 
Damrosch, Barbara. The Garden Primer: Second Edition (New York: Work­
man, 2008). 
Edible Communities. A network of excellent local magazines on local 
food. For more information: www.ecublecornmunities.com. 
Gussow, Joan Dye. This Organic Life: Confessions of a Suburban Homesteader 
(White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green, 2001). 
Jeavons, John. How to Grow More Vegetables (Berkeley: Ten Speed Press, 
2006). 
Kingsolver, Barbara, et al. Animal.Vegetable, Miracle: AYear of Food Life (New 
York: HarperCollins, 2007). 
McKibben, Bill. Deep Economy.TheWealth of Communities and the Durable Future 
(NewYork: Henry Holt and Company, LLC, 2007). 
Madison, Deborah, local Flavors: Cooking and Eating from America's Farmers 
Markets (NewYork: Broadway Books, 2002). 
Nabhan, Gary Paul. Coming Home to Eat.The Pleasures and Politics of Local Foods 
(NewYork: WW Norton, 2002). 
Peterson, John, and Angelic Organics. Farmer Johns Cookbook.The Real Dirt 
on Vegetables (Salt Lake City: Gibbs Smith, Publisher, 2006). 
Salatin, Joel. Holy Cows and Hog Heaven:The Food Buyers Guide to Farm-Fresh 
Food (Swoope.VA: Polyface, 2006). 
WEB 
Center for Informed Food Choices (www.informedeating.org) 
advocates for a diet based on whole, unprocessed, local, organi-230 « RESOURCES 
cally grown plant foods; their Web site contains a useful FAQ page 
about food politics and eating well in addition to an archive of 
relevant articles. 
Eat Local Challenge (www.eatlocalchallenge.com) offers resources 
and encouragement for people trying to eat locally. 
Eat Well (www.eatwellguide.com) is an online directory of sus-
tainably raised meat, poultry, dairy, and eggs. Enter your zip code 
to find healthful, humane, and ecofriendly products from farms, 
stores, and restaurants in your area. 
Eat Wild (www.eatwild.com) lists local suppliers for grass-fed meat 
and dairy products. 
Food Routes (www.foodroutes.org) is a national nonprofit ded­
icated to "reintroducing Americans to their food—the seeds it 
grows from, the farmers who produce it, and the routes that carry 
it from the fields to our tables." 
Local Harvest (www.localharvest.com) helps you connect with 
local farmers, CSAs, and farmers' markets. 
Weston A. Price Foundation (www.westonaprice.org) is an ar­
chive of information on the sorts of traditional whole-food diets 
advocated by Weston A. Price. Local chapters are good resources 
on where to find some of the best pastured animal foods. INDEX 
Aborigines, 85-90, 101, 135, 142, 
145 
additives, 37, 153, 177 
Africa, 90-91, 97 
agriculture, 10, 14, 98, 106, He­
ll, 161, 186 
community-supported (CSA), 
158-59 
industrial, 101, 116, 118-21, 
126 
organic, 99, 101, 120 
Agriculture Department, U.S. 
(USDA), 77, 112, 118, 121 
alcohol, 70, 88n 
red wine, 177, 178, 181 
alfalfa sprouts, 79 
algae, 125 
Allport, Susan, 125, 127, 129 
alpha-linolenic acid, 125n 
Alzheimer's disease, 129 
American Cancer Society, 60 
American Heart Association, 23, 35, 
48, 52, 60, 156 
Americanization, 58 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 110 
Ames, Bruce, 123-24 
amino acids, 21, 31, 165, 175 
amylase, 113n 
anchovies, 172 
animal fat, 4—5 
U.S. reduction of, 46-47 
see also butter animal protein, 25, 26, 29, 30, 51, 57n 
in non-Western diet, 97, 98 
nutritionism and, 37-38, 56, 
67-68 
rationing of, 47 
see also dairy products; meat 
animals: 
diet of, 37-38, 167-68, 171 
wild, 86, 171-72 
anti-inflammatory drugs, 131 
antioxidants, 120, 139, 141, 167 
in grains, 108, 110 
health contributions of, 39, 64, 
163,164 
in milk, 153-54 
in plant leaves, 125, 162-64 
removed from food context, 64, 66 
in thyme, 64-65 
see also vitamin C 
anxiety, 6, 79, 80 
food mixing and, 57n 
nutritionism and, 53 
appendicitis, 91 
apples, 118 
Archer Daniels Midland, 177 
Asian diets, 173-76, 179 
Atkins diet, 38, 59n 
attention deficit disorder (ADD), 130 
Australia, 96 
Aborigines in, 85-90, 101, 135, 
142, 145 
avocado, 38 232 «i INDEX 
baby formula, 20, 21, 31-32, 36 
omega-3s in, 130 
bananas, 79 
Battle Creek sanitarium, 56 
beans, corn with, 174-75 
beef, 4, 24, 31, 37, 38, 67 
portion size for, 76 
as whole vs. industrial food, 143 
Beef Trust, 160 
beriberi, 21, 109 
Berry, Wendell, 159n, 161, 196-97 
beta-carotene, 26, 64, 77, 168 
biodiversity, 169 
black Americans, 92, 136 
Block, Gladys, 77-78 
blood clotting, 126, 129 
blood pressure, 87, 18On 
see also hypertension 
body-mass index (BMI), 88n 
bouillon, 20 
brain, human, 125 
fat in, 49 
glucose and, 107, 111 
mercury and, 5 
satiety and, 193 
Bratman, Steven, 9n 
bread, 38, 109, 115, 118, 135 
ingredients in, 151-54 
labels on, 37 
breast cancer, 73 
Brillat-Savarin, Jean-Anthelme, 7 
broccoli, 116 
Brody, Jane, 50, 54 
Burkitt, Denis P., 90-91, 142, 145 
Bush, George H.W, 54 
butter, 47, 98, 127 
color of, 168 
imitation rule and, 34 
margarine vs., 4, 27, 33, 34, 42, 46 
B vitamins, 108, 110, 115, 165, 178 
alcohol and, 181 
deficiencies of, 109, 123, 175 calcium, 77, 118 
California, University of (Davis), 39 
calories, 59, 69, 79, 132, 144 
addition of, 118, 122, 186, 191 
corn as percent of, 117 
differences in energy from, 63 
from fats, 10, 59, 73-74 
nutrition per, 119 
from plants, 165 
production vs. consumption of, 
74n 
restriction of, 184-85 
from sugar, 10, 112, 122 
Campbell,T. Colin, 25-26, 68, 
71-72 
cancer, 5, 10, 11, 22, 25-26, 33, 
39, 177 
calorie restriction and, 184 
fruits and vegetables and, 26, 
63-64, 123, 164 
growth hormones and, 68 
low-fat diets and, 5,73 
micronutrient deficiency and, 123 
Western diet and, 86, 87, 88n, 90, 
91, 93, 109, 140, 166 
Cannon, Geoffrey, 28, 53n 
carbohydrate hypothesis, 59-60, 
139,140 
carbohydrates, 7, 11, 20, 21, 47, 
117, 124, 139, 179 
absorption of, 66-67 
Atkins diet and, 38 
calories in, 59 
fats vs., 30,45, 50-51, 59, 69 
metabolism of, 66-67, 85, 111, 
112n, 113, 126 
protein vs., 30 
refined, 47, 85, 88, 91, 92, 106-
9, 111-15, 122, 132, 140, 148 
refined vs. fiber, 30 
cardiovascular disease, 73, 87, 90, 
128-30, 132 INDEX Oi 233 
carotenes, 64, 108 
beta-, 26, 64, 77, 168 
carotenoids, 66, 120 
carrots, 38, 39, 66, 188 
cars, eating in, 188-89, 191 
case-control studies, 71 
cell membranes, 129 
cell metabolism, 163 
cereals, 30, 39-40, 98, 113n, 115, 
116 
health claims for, 156-57 
chewing, 56-57 
chicken, 24, 31, 37, 116, 167 
"free range," 168n 
Child, Julia, 3 
children, 122-23, 189 
see also baby formula 
Children's Hospital and Research 
Center, 121 
China, 176 
food from, 159, 160-61 
China Study,The (Campbell), 68, 72 
chocolate, milk, 79-80 
"chocolate cake," response to 79 
cholesterol, blood, 47-48, 63, 
65-66, 141 
good vs. bad, 44 
lowering of, 44, 60 
cholesterol, dietary, 19, 26, 27, 33, 
35, 179 
heart disease and, 23, 43, 48, 67 
oxidized vs. ordinary, 153 
CIA World Fdctbook, 93n 
Claiborne, Craig, 3 
Clinton, Bill, 54 
Coca-Cola, 111, 170 
coca leaves, 105 
coffee, 67 
cohort studies, 71-72 
colon, 56 
colon cancer, 88n 
colorectal cancer, 5,73 common sense, 13 
community-supported agriculture 
(CSA), 158-59 
confounders, 70 
confusion, 6, 78-80 
Congress, U.S., 25n, 35 
see also Senate, U.S. 
Conspiracy of Scientific Complexity, 
6-7 
convenience food, 186-87 
cooking, 197, 199-201 
corn, 79, 104-7, 186 
with beans, 174—75 
dominance of, 10, 116-17, 121-
22, 169 
corn flour, 108 
corn oil, 127, 155-56 
corn syrup, 104-5, 107, 122 
avoiding products with, 150-54 
cows, 98, 102-3, 121, 127 
feeding of, 167-68, 171 
C-reactive protein, 66 
Crete, 70 
culture, 12 
eating and, 3, 8, 29, 49-50, 133 
Western diet and, 132-36 
see also manners, mores, and 
habits 
dairy products, 51, 97, 124, 153, 
179 
omega-3s vs. omega-6s in, 126 
rationing of, 23 
see also butter; milk 
D.A.S.H. (Dietary Approaches to Stop 
Hypertension) study, 18 On 
deer, 172 
dental problems, 91, 94-98 
depression, 130, 132 
desert island, food for, 79-80 
dessert, 67 
DHA, 125n 234 *» INDEX 
diabetes, 10, 1 1, 22, 50, 58-60 
new industry for, 136, 141 
omega-3s and, 129 
type 2, 85, 87, 88n, 93, 1 13, 136n 
Western diet and, 85, 87, 88n, 90, 
91, 93, 109, 124, 128, 135, 
136, 140 
Diabetic Living, 136 
Diagnosis and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, 9n, 80 
Dietary Goals for the United States (1977), 
22, 36, 37, 45, 48-51, 60 
dietary guidelines, 12, 23 
diets, 106 
of animals, 37-38, 167-68, 171 
Asian, 173-76, 179 
Atkins, 38, 59n 
diversity of, 11, 12, 96, 97-98, 
100, 162 
food studied out of context of, 
66-69 
grape, 56 
high-carb, 11,51 
high-fat, 11, 162 
lifestyle factors and, 70 
low-risk, Willett's views on, 88n 
Mediterranean, 70, 170, 173, 174, 
177, 178, 179, 181 
non-Western, 86, 96-98 
traditional, 173-80 
vegetarian, 70, 164 
see also disease, diet and; low-fat 
diets; Western diet 
digestion, 30, 63, 64, 67 
of carbohydrates, 105n 
of milk, 102 
of refined foods, 106-7 
dining vs. feeding, 7 
disease: 
calorie restriction and, 184 
deficiency, 21, 109, 122-23, 140, 
175 diet and, 10-1 1,21, 22-23, 25-
26, 85-94, 109, 113, 124, 128, 
135, 136, 139-42, 164-66, 
171, 179 
life expectancy and, 92-93 
treatment of, 136, 141 
see also specific diseases 
diverticulitis, 91 
DNA, 123 
free radicals and, 64, 65 
Douglas, Mary, 57n 
drugs, 131, 136, 141 
eating, 1-2, 15, 146-61 
and avoiding supermarket, 
157-60 
defense of, 7-8 
feeding vs., 7 
great grandmother's rule and, 
148-50 
health claims and, 154—57 
health as purpose of, 8-9, 29 
identity and, 8, 29, 58, 174 
ingredient rules for, 150-54 
pleasure and, 8, 12 
policies for, see manners, mores, 
and habits 
sex compared with, 54-55 
supermarket peripheries and, 15 7 
time spent in, 145, 182-83 
understanding of term, 7 
ecology and environment, 2, 99-
106, 144-45, 171-72 
eggs, 37-38, 41, 47, 126, 167-68 
England, 111,116 
Enig, Mary, 45 
enzymes, 102, 104, 107, 113n, 126 
EPA, 125n 
erectile dysfunction, 39 
Eskimos, 98, 129 
essential fatty acids, see omega-3 fatty 
acids; omega-6 fatty acids INDEX « 235 
estrogen, 177 
exercise, 47, 88n, 198 
eyes, 126 
fads, food, 37, 56, 68 
farmers' markets, 14, 157-60, 168 
fast food, 121, 134, 135-36, 143, 
194, 195 
fats, dietary, 4-7, 10, 20, 21, 35, 66, 
117, 122, 124, 132, 139, 186 
calories in, 59 
cancer and, 25 
carbohydrates vs., 30, 45, 50-51, 
59,69 
in Greek diet, 178 
heart disease and, 5, 23 
lipid hypothesis and, 23,33, 
40-50, 59n, 80, 139, 140 
metabolism of, 85 
reduction of, 23, 37, 42, 47, 51, 
60, 63, 68, 69 
sec also butter; margarine; 
polyunsaturated fat; saturated 
fat; trans fats; unsaturated fat; 
vegetable oils 
feeding vs. eating or dining, 7 
fertilizer: 
chemical, 99, 101, 114-15, 117, 
119-20, 159, 169 
protein as, 29 
fiber, dietary, 19, 64, 66, 104, 110, 
112, 125 
disease prevention and, 5, 92, 165 
feeling of fullness and, 112-13 
refined carbohydrates vs., 30, 107 
fish, 23, 24, 31,47, 70, 88n, 98, 179 
omega-3s in, 5, 125 
wild, 171, 172 
flavor principles, 174 
flaxseed, as animal feed, 37-38 
Fletcher, Horace, 30, 56-57 
Fletcherizing, 56-57 flexitarians, 164, 166 
flour, refined, 97, 106-9, 111,115 
foie gras, 177-78 
folic acid, 88n, 108, 109, 110, 123 
food: 
abundance of, 54 
declining nutritional quality of, 
92, 97, 99, 115-16, 118-23, 
167 
defense of, 7-8 
demand for, 52 
FDA redefinition of, 36 
income allocated for, 145, 187 
postindustrial era, 14 
price of, 118, 121-22, 143, 145, 
183-87 
as thing vs. relationship, 102-3, 
144-45 
food chains (food webs), 102-3, 
144, 161 
lengthening of, 99 
simplification of, 114-18 
see also food industry 
Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), 36, 39, 52 
health claims and, 154, 155-56 
imitation rule and, 34, 35, 150 
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act 
(1938), 34 
food experience, 188 
food-frequency questionnaires 
(FFQs), 71, 74-78 
food industry, 4-8, 10-14, 80-81, 
91-92,99-136 
business model of, 117, 141 
imitation rule and, 34-35, 38, 
150, 151 
nutritionism and, 32-40, 52 
shift from complexity to 
simplicity in, 116-18 
shift from food culture to science 
in, 132-36 236 *» INDEX 
food industry (cont.) 
shift from leaves to seeds in, 
124-32 
shift from quality to quantity in, 
115,118-24 
shift from whole foods to refined 
in, 106-14 
see also processed food 
food intake, underestimation of, 74 
Food Politics (Nestle), 76, 134n 
food processing, traditional, 175-76 
food products, 150-54 
deceptive diversity of, 169 
health claims on, 2, 6, 39, 40, 
52-53, 154-57 
FoodReview, 122n 
food synergy, 110-11, 115, 165 
free radicals, 64, 65, 163, 184 
"free range," use of term, 168n 
freezers, 168 
French paradox, 9, 29, 177-78, 
182-83 
French people, 173,184-85,188 
chocolate cake and, 79 
food spending of, 145n 
satiety in, 185, 193 
Frito-Lay, 127, 155 
chips, 52-53 
fructose, 105, 111-12, 113, 122 
metabolism of, 112n 
fruit, 10, 122, 123, 179, 180n 
cancer and, 26, 63-64, 123, 164 
fructose in, 105n, 112 
health claims and, 154 
ripeness of, 103-4, 112 
Funk, Casimir, 21 
gardens, 197-99 
gasoline rationing, 47 
gas stations, food at, 192 
General Mills, 190 
genetic engineering, 38 genetics, genes, 92, 102-3, 113n, 
135 
quantity vs. quality and, 120-21 
glucose, 104, 105, 107, 113, 129 
brain and, 107, 111 
metabolism of, 112n, 126 
Go-Gurt Portable Yogurt tubes, 
148-49 
Good Calories, Bad Calories (Taubes), 46, 
59n 
government, 2, 3, 8, 30, 80, 130— 
31, 133 
see also Food and Drug 
Administration; Senate, U.S. 
grains, 124, 167 
grinding of, 107-8 
refined, 10, 97, 106-9, 122, 179 
whole, 10, 88n, 109-11, 165 
see also cereals; flour; specific grains 
grape diets, 56 
GRAS ("generally regarded as safe"), 
177 
grass-fed animals, 167-68, 171 
"grass-finished" cattle, 168n 
great grandmother rule, 148-50 
Greek diet, 173, 178 
greenhouse gas, 166n 
greens, wild, 70, 127, 170-71 
growth hormones, 68, 166 
guilt, 79 
Gussow, Joan, 26, 28, 147, 149 
Haber, Fritz, 114-15 
Halweil, Brian, 119-21 
hamburgers, 38, 196 
happiness, 9, 54 
Harrison, William Henry, 54 
Harvard obesity theory, 186-87, 191 
Harvard School of Public Health, 
41-45 
Harvard study, 5 
Hawaiians, native, 8 7 INDEX « 237 
health, 8-12, 14, 19-24 
antioxidants and, 163 
environment and, 144—45 
food chain relationships and, 103 
lipid hypothesis and, 23, 33, 
40-50, 59n, 80, 139, 140 
nutrients and, 19-22, 29-30, 40 
organic and, 170 
as purpose of eating, 8-9, 29 
science vs. culture and, 134 
health care: 
cost of, 135-36, 187 
as industry, 136, 141 
health claims, on food products, 2, 
6, 39,40, 52-53, 154-57 
heart attacks, 5, 33, 44-45, 47, 60, 
61, 92 
heart disease, 5, 9, 10, 11, 22, 39, 
67 
alcohol and, 181 
decline in mortality from, 60-61 
diabetics and, 136 
lipid hypothesis and, 23, 33, 
40-50, 59n, 80, 139, 140 
omega-3sand, 128-29, 171 
social class and, 71 
sugar and, 15 7 
Western diet and, 85-86, 88n, 91, 
93, 109, 128-29, 140, 166, 
179 
Hebrides, 97-98 
Hegsted, Mark, 48-49 
heme iron, 68 
hemorrhoids, 91 
Hibbeln, Joseph, 131-32 
high-carb diets, 11,51 
high-fat diets, 11, 162 
high-protein diets, 38, 59n 
Hippocrates, 29 
Hispanic Americans, 136 
homicide, 130 
honey, 112, 153 hot dogs, 38, 79-80 
Howard, Sir Albert, 99-103, 170 
Hrdlicka, Ales, 9091 
Hu, Frank B., 42, 59 
hummingbirds, 129 
hunger, 59, 12324, 130 
hunter-gatherer lifestyle, 86, 87, 106 
Hutton, Samuel, 9091 
hydrogenated vegetable oils, 5,33, 
35,4243,127 
hygiene, tooth decay and, 9495 
hypertension, 128, 141 
Western diet and, 85-86, 87, 91 
identity, eating and, 8, 29, 58, 174 
imitation rule, 34-35, 38, 150, 151 
immigrant groups, 57-58, 92 
income, allocated for food, 145, 
187 
India, 173 
industrialization, 93-94, 100-101 
see also food industry; processed 
food 
inflammation, 126, 128-29, 163, 
184 
ingredient rules, 150-54 
insulin, 105, 112n, 113 
metabolism of, 59, 85, 104, 170 
insulin resistance, 44, 85, 129 
insulin response, 66-67, 87, 129 
intervention trials, 71-75 
intestines, 63 
Inuit, 129, 135 
iron, 67, 68, 110, 118, 121 
Italy, Italians, 145n, 173, 194, 195 
Jacobs, David R., 110-11 
James, Henry, 5 7 
James, William, 57 
Japanese, 128, 171, 173, 176 
Jefferson, Thomas, 166 
Jewish diet, 3, 173, 174 238 «» INDEX 
journalists, journalism, 2, 6, 28, 40, 
52, 80, 133 
Jungle,The (Sinclair), 34 
Kellogg, John Harvey, 30, 56, 57 
Keyes, Ancel, 42-43 
Kraft, 190 
Kummerow, Fred, 45 
labels, food, 34-35, 37, 53, 149 
lactase, 102 
lamb's quarters, 170 
lard, 46 
Latin America, 174—75 
learning disabilities, 130 
Levenstein, Harvey, 28, 54, 55, 57n 
Liebig, Justus von, 20-21, 26, 29, 
30, 66, 114 
Liebig's Extractum Carnis, 20 
life expectancy, 92-93 
lifestyle, 70, 71, 110, 142 
hunter-gatherer, 86, 87, 106 
sedentary, 85 
linoleic acid, 131, 167 
lipid hypothesis, 23, 33, 40-50, 59n, 
80, 139, 140 
liver (body organ), 112n 
liver (food), 177-78 
Livestocks Long Shadow (Steinfeld), 166n 
low-fat diets, 5, 9, 11, 45, 88, 162, 
179 
in Nurses' Health Study, 72 
nutritionism and, 24, 50-51, 
58-61, 68 
in Women's Health Initiative, 5, 
72-74 
low-fat products, 35-36, 41,51, 
55, 141 
dairy, 153-54 
low-meat diets, 23-24 
Ludwig, David S., 134n 
lycopene, 64, 67, 200 McCarrison, Robert, 90-91, 96 
McGovern, George, 22-25, 36, 45, 
48, 51, 60, 69 
mackerel, 172 
macronutrients, 20, 30, 66, 114, 
117, 118, 124 
see also carbohydrates; fats, dietary; 
protein 
magnesium, 110, 119 
manganese, 110 
manners, mores, and habits, 143-44, 
146, 182-201 
cooking and gardening as, 
197-201 
eating slowly as, 194—97 
gas station avoidance and, 192 
meals and, 188-92 
pay more, eat less as, 183-88 
satiety and, 193-94 
margarine, 4, 32-33, 46 
imitation rule and, 34 
trans fats and, 27, 33, 42, 127, 
154-55 
Mars Corporation, 39 
Masai, 97 
mayonnaise, 37 
Mazola corn oil, 156 
meals, 188-92 
eating occasions vs., 188-89 
polls about, 189 
sharing of, 189, 190, 192 
at tables, 192 
time spent for preparation of, 145 
Meanjin, 27 
meat, 1, 10, 13, 30, 67-70, 92, 124, 
165-67, 179 
freezing of, 168 
growth hormones in, 68 
iron in, 67, 68 
in non-Western diet, 86, 97, 98 
omega-3 vs. omega-6 in, 126 
portion sizes for, 76 INDEX « 239 
red vs. white, 51 
reduction of consumption of, 
23-24, 47, 51 
from wild animals, 86, 171-72 
see also beef; pork 
Mediterranean diet, 70, 170, 173, 
174, 177, 178, 179, 181 
menopause, 177 
mercury, fish contaminated with, 5 
metabolic syndrome (syndrome X), 
85-86, 89, 1 13, 135, 140 
metabolism, 20, 63, 129-30 
of carbohydrates, 66-67, 85, 111, 
112n, 113, 126 
cell, 163 
insulin, 59, 85, 104, 170 
Mexico, 173 
micronutrients, 112, 123, 124, 132, 
140 
see also specific micronutrients 
microwaves, 187, 190 
milk, 30, 31, 102-3, 123, 167 
growth hormones in, 68 
lactose in, 63 
low-fat or skim, 153-54 
in non-Western diet, 97, 98 
powdered, 153 
quantity vs. quality of, 121 
Mindless Eating (Wansink), 194 
minerals, 20, 92, 98, 112, 115 
in organic soil, 120 
monounsaturated fat, 38 
multivitamins, 172 
Muslims, 174 
mycorrhizae, 120 
National Academy of Sciences: 
Institute of Medicine at, 5 
1982 report of, 25-27, 36, 37, 
51, 60 
National Institutes of Health, 72, 131 
Native Americans, 87 natural selection, 112, 113n, 135, 
164, 172 
Nestle, Marion, 28, 62, 69-70, 
76-77, 134n, 162 
New England Journal of Medicine, 61 
"New Light on Some Relationships 
Between Soil Mineral 
Deficiencies, Low Vitamin 
Foods, and Some Degenerative 
Diseases" (Price), 99 
New York Times, 35, 50, 73 
Nihoffjohn, 189n 
nitrogen, 20, 29 
in fertilizer, 99, 114 
nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium 
(NPK), 20, 114-15 
nitrosamines, 68 
Nixon, Richard M., 121, 186 
nonsmokers, 88n 
Northbourne, Lord, 100 
Nurses' Health Study, 68, 71-74, 
88n, 89, 142, 179 
nutrients, 9, 11, 19-32, 40, 88, 144 
decline of quality of, 92, 97, 99, 
115-16, 118-23, 167 
food vs., 8, 18-28 
studied out of food context, 
61-66 
see also macronutrients; 
micronutrients; specific nutrients 
nutrition, nutritionists, 3, 6, 33 
Nutritional Industrial Complex, 8 
Nutrition and Physical Degeneration (Price), 
95, 100 
nutritionism, 17-81, 101, 102, 109, 
139, 142, 189, 200 
attractiveness of, 51-52 
bad science and, 61-78 
blind spot of, 11 
defined, 27-32 
dualism of, 31 
French paradox and, 182 240 *>> INDEX 
nutritionism (cont.) 
getting over, 137-201 
as ideology, 28, 80 
lipid hypothesis and, 33, 40-50 
low-fat diet and, 24, 50-51, 
58-61 
O'Dea's avoidance of, 88 
processed food and, 32-40, 52, 
55, 133 
rise of, 9-10, 11, 105, 133 
sacrificing pleasure and, 53-58 
nutrition science, 3-9, 28, 40, 52, 
61-78, 80, 115-16, 139-41 
authority of, 3 
and eating plants, 162 
food industry and, 134 
food studied out of diet context 
in, 66-69 
health claims and, 154—55 
limits of, 12-13 
lipid hypothesis and, 23, 41-49, 
80 
nutrients studied out of context of 
food in, 61-66 
reductionism of, 12, 62-63, 65, 
105, 109, 110, 139, 178-79 
shift from food culture to, 132-36 
shifting grounds of, 4, 5, 53 
nuts, 154, 165 
Oakland, Calif, rickets in, 122-23 
oat bran, 3 7 
oats, 98 
obesity, 11, 22, 50, 58-60 
Ames's theory of, 123-24 
Harvard theory of, 186-87, 191 
omega-3 s and, 129 
refined carbohydrates and, 
112-13 
Western diet and, 85-86, 87, 90, 
91, 112-13, 123-24, 135 
O'Dea, Kerin, 86-88, 96 oils: 
in flour, 107-8 
see also vegetable oils 
Okinawa, 185 
olive oil, 67, 70, 177, 178, 200 
omega-3 fatty acids, 31, 39, 44, 87, 
125-32, 167, 171 
deficiencies of, 59n, 140 
in flour, 108, 109 
foods fortified with, 5-6, 37-38, 
134-35 
omega-6 compared with, 126 
role of, 125-26, 165 
omega-6 fatty acids, 31,125-32, 
155, 166, 167 
role of, 126 
omnivores, 2, 117-18, 169 
Omnivores Dilemma,The (Pollan), 2 
"1A plus 2B," 57n 
oranges, 21 
Organic Center, 119 
organic food, 14, 159, 169-70 
orthorexics, 9, 80 
overnutrition, 7 
overweight, 122-23, 130, 135 
Packer, The, 119n 
parking-lot science, 66 
pasta, 38 
peaches, 79 
peanut butter, 66-67 
pellagra, 109, 175 
Perfection Salad (Shapiro), 55 
Perry, George H., 113n 
pesticides, 101, 115, 120, 159, 169, 
184 
Petrini, Carlo, 195 
phosphorus, 20, 114-15 
photosynthesis, 64, 125, 126, 164 
phytic acid, 110 
phytochemicals, 120, 125 
phytoestrogens, 177 INDEX « 
pigs, 37, 38, 167, 172 
placebo effect, 69 
plants, plant food, 25, 86 
absence of, 97 
for animals, 167-68 
biodiversity and, 169 
as diet mainstay, 1, 22-23, 146, 
161-81 
freezer use and, 168 
growth of, 20, 98, 114 
omega-3 fatty acids in, 125, 126— 
27, 132, 165 
protein from, 30 
shift from leaves to seeds of, 
124-32 
and skepticism for nontraditional 
foods, 176-77 
supplements and, 172 
traditional diets and, 173-80 
well-grown and healthy soil rule 
for, 169-70 
wild foods and, 170-72 
wine use and, 181 
pleasure, eating and, 8, 12, 29 
nutritionism and, 53-58 
"Pleasures of Eating,The" (Berry), 
159n 
polyphenols, 66, 120 
polyunsaturated fat, 43, 60 
saturated fat vs., 31, 3 3, 44, 51, 
53, 69, 88n 
see also omega-3 fatty acids; omega-
6 fatty acids 
pomegranate, 39 
pork, 37, 38 
portion size, 76, 182, 183, 185, 
189, 190, 194 
potassium, 20, 114-15 
potatoes, 21, 38, 39 
french fries, 179, 186 
poultry, 23 
see also chicken Powles, John, 67 
presidents, U.S., food tastes of, 54 
Price, Weston A., 90-91, 92, 94-
103,173 
processed food, 1-2, 10, 11, 117, 
124, 141, 149-50 
decline of nutrients in, 92, 97, 99, 
115-16, 119 
nutritionism and, 32-40, 52, 55, 
133 
omega-3s and, 127 
organic, 169-70 
traditional diets and, 178-79 
whole food vs., 1, 32, 143, 162 
protein, 11,20,21,26, 66, 69, 117, 
124, 179 
backlash against, 30 
calories in, 59 
chewing of, 56-57 
elevation of, 29-30 
see also animal protein; specific foods 
Prout, William, 20, 66 
Public Library of Science, 134n 
PubMed, 178 
Puritanism, 54—55 
purslane, 127, 170 
"Pursuit of Optimal Diets, The" 
(Willett), 88n 
Queen of Rits, The (Allport) ,125,127, 
129 
rats, omega-3s and, 129 
refined food: 
carbohydrates, 47, 85, 88, 91, 
92, 106-9, 111-15, 122, 132, 
140, 148 
shift from whole food to, 106-14 
"Relationships Between Funding 
Source and Conclusion among 
Nutrition-Related Scientific 
Articles" (Ludwig et al.), 134n 242 « INDEX 
religious food, 174 
Renner, Martin, 95, 99 
responders, 69 
Revolution of the Table (Levenstein), 5 7n 
rheumatoid arthritis, 128 
riboflavin, 118 
rice, 117, 118, 174 
white, 106, 108 
rickets, 122-23 
Rockefeller, John D., 56 
Rodale.J.L, 170 
Roosevelt, Theodore, 56 
rotting food, 149 
Rozin, Paul, 79-80, 174, 183, 185, 
188 
sailors, sickness in, 21 
salmon, 172 
Sara Lee's Soft & Smooth Whole 
Grain White Bread, 151-54 
sardines, 172 
satiety, 185, 193-94 
saturated fat, 19, 24, 25n, 35, 67, 68, 
92, 167, 179 
difficulties of designing trials for, 
69 
lipid hypothesis and, 23, 42, 43, 
47-48 
in meat, 166, 167, 171 
polyunsaturated fat vs., 31, 33, 44, 
51, S3, 69, 88n 
reduction of, 23, 37, 42, 47, 51, 
60, 63, 69, 127, 131, 180n 
trans fats compared with, 44 
see also butter 
Schweitzer, Albert, 90-91 
Scrinis, Gyorgy, 27-28, 32, 143 
scurvy, 21 
seafood, 86, 98 
see also fish 
seeds, shift from leaves to, 124-32 
selenium, 121 Senate, U.S., Select Committee on 
Nutrition and Human Needs of, 
22-25,48,51,69 
Seventh-Day Adventists, 70 
sex, eating compared with, 54-55 
Shapiro, Laura, 55 
Sinclair, Upton, 34, 160 
Slow Food, 194-96 
smoking, 61, 70, 128 
snacks, 186, 188, 190-91, 192 
social class, 71 
soda, 123, 170 
vitamin-fortified, 111 
soil, 101, 102, 114-15 
macronutrients in, 20, 114 
organic, 119, 120 
quality of, 98-100, 169-70 
"Sorry Marge" (Scrinis), 27 
soup study, 185n 
South America, 105 
soy, soybeans, 124, 186 
dominance of, 10, 116-17, 121-
22, 169 
fermenting of, 175 
soybean oil, 122, 131 
soy isoflavones, 176-77 
soy protein isolate, 176-77 
Spanish people, 145n 
spicy food, 173-74 
spinach, 79 
State Department, U.S., 25n 
Steffen, Lyn M., 110-11 
Steinfeld, Henning, 166n 
stews, 57n 
"Still No Free Lunch" (Halweil), 
118-21 
stroke, 10, 91, 128, 131 
sucrose, 25, 105n, 111-12 
sugar, 104, 111-14, 140, 179 
calories from, 10, 112, 122 
disease and, 91, 97 
health claims and, 156-57 INDEX « 243 
lobby for, 25n 
metabolism of, 63, 111, 112n 
rationing of, 47 
see also fructose; glucose; sucrose 
suicide, 130, 131 
supermarkets, 13-14, 19, 36, 41, 
116, 121, 147 
avoiding, 157-61 
organic food in, 159, 169-70 
peripheries of, 157 
shopping in, 146, 148, 157 
supplements, 70, 109, 111, 131, 172 
antioxidant, 64 
Supreme Court, U.S., 34 
Switzerland, teeth in, 96 
tallow, 46 
Taubes, Gary, 46, 48, 59n, 69 
thrombogenesis, 44 
thromboxane, 129 
thyme, 64-65, 67 
tofu, 175 
tomatoes, 67, 200 
trans fats, 31,44, 49, 51 
low intake of, 88n 
margarine and, 27, 33, 42, 127, 
154-55 
treatment effect, 74 
triglycerides, 44, 66, 112n 
of Aborigines, 85, 87 
turkey, 116 
Twinkies, 186 
"Types of Dietary Fat and Risk 
of Coronary Heart Disease" 
(Harvard review), 41-45 
ulcers, 91 
undernutrition, 7 
unit bias, 183 
United Nations, 166n 
unsaturated fat, 31 
see also polyunsaturated fat validation studies, 74—75 
Van Buren, Martin, 54 
varicose veins, 91 
vegetable oils, 35, 46, 97, 116-17 
corn, 127, 155-56 
hydrogenated, 5, 33, 35, 42-43, 
127 
olive, 67, 70, 177, 178, 200 
soybean, 122, 131 
vegetables, 10, 26, 122, 123, 179, 
180n 
cancer and, 26, 63-64, 123, 164 
vegetarian diets, 70, 164 
vitamin A, 33, 49, 97, 98, 119 
vitamin B6, 123 
vitamin B12, 123, 165 
vitaminC, 26, 118, 119, 123 
eating plants and, 162-64 
vitamin D, 33, 97, 98 
vitamin E, 49, 64, 110, 119, 123 
vitamin K2, 98 
vitamins, 21-22, 33, 66, 92, 98, 
109, 115 
see also B vitamins 
walnuts, 39 
Wansink, Brian, 185, 193-94 
weight gain, 45, 59 
weight loss, 45, 87 
Western diet, 10-12, 83-136, 179 
dental problems and, 91, 94-98 
escape from, 12, 14, 139-46 
in Nurses' Health Study, 72 
reversibility of diseases of, 
85-89 
review of, 90-101 
shift from complexity to 
simplicity in, 116-18 
shift from food culture to science 
in, 132-36 
shift from leaves to seeds in, 
124-32 o> INDEX 
Western diet (cont.) 
shift from quality to quantity in, 
115, 118-24 
shift from whole to refined foods 
in, 106-14 
wheat, 10, 117, 118, 121-22, 
169 
grinding of, 107-9 
quantity vs. quality of, 121 
wholefood, 1, 32, 104, 119 
grains, 10, 88n, 109-11, 165 
nutritionism and, 37-39 
processed food vs., 1, 32, 143, 
162 
shift to refined food from, 
106-14 
wild food, 70, 127, 170-72 Willett, Walter C, 60, 72, 77, 88n, 
141-42 
wine, red, 177, 178, 181 
Women's Health Initiative, 5, 68, 
72-78, 89 
FFQs and, 74-78 
flaws in, 73-74 
work, snacking at, 190-91 
World Health Organization (WHO), 
25n 
World War II, 47 
yogurt, 37, 148-49 
yogurt enemas, 56 
Yudkin, John, 45, 148 
zinc, 110, 118, 121 