Praise for The Body Keeps the Scor e
“This book is a tour de force. Its deeply empathic, insightful, and
compassionate perspective promises to further humanize the treatment of
trauma victims, dramatically expand their repertoire of self-regulatory
healing practices and therapeutic options, and also stimulate greater creative
thinking and research on trauma and its ef fective treatment. The body does
keep the score, and V an der Kolk’ s ability to demonstrate this through
compelling descriptions of the work of others, his own pioneering trajectory
and experience as the field evolved and him along with it, and above all, his
discovery of ways to work skillfully with people by bringing mindfulness to
the body (as well as to their thoughts and emotions) through yoga,
movement, and theater are a wonderful and welcome breath of fresh air and
possibility in the therapy world.”
—Jon Kabat-Zinn, professor of medicine emeritus, UMass Medical School;
author of Full Catastr ophe Living
“This exceptional book will be a classic of modern psychiatric thought. The
impact of overwhelming experience can only be truly understood when
many disparate domains of knowledge, such as neuroscience,
developmental psychopathology , and interpersonal neurobiology are
integrated, as this work uniquely does. There is no other volume in the field
of traumatic stress that has distilled these domains of science with such rich
historical and clinical perspectives, and arrived at such innovative treatment
approaches. The clarity of vision and breadth of wisdom of this unique but
highly accessible work is remarkable. This book is essential reading for
anyone interested in understanding and treating traumatic stress and the
scope of its impact on society .”
—Alexander McFarlane AO, MB BS (Hons) MD FRANZCP , director of the
Centre for T raumatic Stress Studies, The University of Adelaide, South
Australia.
“This is an amazing accomplishment from the neuroscientist most
responsible for the contemporary revolution in mental health toward therecognition that so many mental problems are the product of trauma. W ith
the compelling writing of a good novelist, van der Kolk revisits his
fascinating journey of discovery that has challenged established wisdom in
psychiatry . Interspersed with that narrative are clear and understandable
descriptions of the neurobiology of trauma; explanations of the
inef fectiveness of traditional approaches to treating trauma; and
introductions to the approaches that take patients beneath their cognitive
minds to heal the parts of them that remained frozen in the past. All this is
illustrated vividly with dramatic case histories and substantiated with
convincing research. This is a watershed book that will be remembered as
tipping the scales within psychiatry and the culture at lar ge toward the
recognition of the toll traumatic events and our attempts to deny their
impact take on us all.”
—Richard Schwartz, originator , Internal Family Systems Therapy
“ The  Body Keeps the Scor e  is clear , fascinating, hard to put down, and filled
with powerful case histories. V an der Kolk, the eminent impresario of
trauma treatment, who has spent a career bringing together diverse trauma
scientists and clinicians and their ideas, while making his own pivotal
contributions, describes what is ar guably the most important series of
breakthroughs in mental health in the last thirty years. W e’ve known that
psychological trauma fragments the mind. Here we see not only how
psychological trauma also breaks connections within the brain, but also
between mind and  body , and learn about the exciting new approaches that
allow people with the severest forms of trauma to put all the parts back
together again.”
—Norman Doidge, author of The Brain That Changes Itself
“In The Body Keeps the Scor e  we share the author ’ s courageous journey
into the parallel dissociative worlds of trauma victims and the medical and
psychological disciplines that are meant to provide relief. In this compelling
book we learn that as our minds desperately try to leave trauma behind, our
bodies keep us trapped in the past with wordless emotions and feelings.
These inner disconnections cascade into ruptures in social relationships
with disastrous ef fects on marriages, families, and friendships. V an der
Kolk of fers hope by describing treatments and strategies that havesuccessfully helped his patients reconnect their thoughts with their bodies.
W e leave this shared journey understanding that only through fostering self-
awareness and gaining an inner sense of safety will we, as a species, fully
experience the richness of life.
—Stephen W . Por ges, PhD, professor of psychiatry , University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill; author of The Polyvagal Theory: Neur ophysiological
Foundations of Emotions, Attachment, Communication, and Self-Regulation
“Bessel van der Kolk is unequaled in his ability to synthesize the stunning
developments in the field of psychological trauma over the past few
decades. Thanks in part to his work, psychological trauma—ranging from
chronic child abuse and neglect, to war trauma and natural disasters—is
now generally recognized as a major cause of individual, social, and
cultural breakdown. In this masterfully lucid and engaging tour de force,
V an der Kolk takes us—both specialists and the general public— on his
personal journey and shows what he has learned from his research, from his
colleagues and students, and, most important, from his patients. The Body
Keeps the Scor e  is, simply put, brilliant.”
—Onno van der Hart, PhD, Utrecht University , The Netherlands; senior author ,
The Haunted Self: Structural Dissociation and the T r eatment of Chr onic
T raumatization
“ The Body Keeps the Scor e  articulates new and better therapies for toxic
stress based on a deep understanding of the ef fects of trauma on brain
development and attachment systems. This volume provides a moving
summary of what is currently known about the ef fects of trauma on
individuals and societies, and introduces the healing potential of both age-
old and novel approaches to help traumatized children and adults fully
engage in the present.”
—Jessica Stern, policy consultant on terrorism; author of Denial: A Memoir of
T err or
“A book about understanding the impact of trauma by one of the true
pioneers in the field. It is a rare book that integrates cutting edge
neuroscience with wisdom and understanding about the experience and
meaning of trauma, for people who have suf fered from it. Like its author ,
this book is wise and compassionate, occasionally quite provocative, and
always interesting.”—Glenn N. Saxe, MD, Arnold Simon Professor and chairman, Department of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry; director , NYU Child Study Center , New Y ork
University School of Medicine.
“A fascinating exploration of a wide range of therapeutic treatments shows
readers how to take char ge of the healing process, gain a sense of safety ,
and find their way out of the morass of suf fering.”
—Francine Shapiro, PhD, originator of EMDR therapy; senior research fellow ,
Emeritus Mental Research Institute; author of Getting Past Y our Past
“As an attachment researcher I know that infants are psychobiological
beings. They are as much of the body as they are of the brain. W ithout
language or symbols infants use every one of their biological systems to
make meaning of their self in relation to the world of things and people.
V an der Kolk shows that those very same systems continue to operate at
every age, and that traumatic experiences, especially chronic toxic
experience during early development, produce psychic devastation. W ith
this understanding he provides insight and guidance for survivors,
researchers, and clinicians alike. Bessel van der Kolk may focus on the
body and trauma, but what a mind he must have to have written this book.”
—Ed T ronick, distinguished professor , University of Massachusetts, Boston;
author of Neur obehavior and Social Emotional Development of Infants and
Y oung Childr en
“ The Body Keeps the Scor e  eloquently articulates how overwhelming
experiences af fect the development of brain, mind, and body awareness, all
of which are closely intertwined. The resulting derailments have a profound
impact on the capacity for love and work. This rich integration of clinical
case examples with ground breaking scientific studies provides us with a
new understanding of trauma, which inevitably leads to the exploration of
novel therapeutic approaches that ‘rewire’ the brain, and help traumatized
people to reengage in the present. This book will provide traumatized
individuals with a guide to healing and permanently change how
psychologists and psychiatrists think about trauma and recovery .”
—Ruth A. Lanius, MD, PhD, Harris-W oodman chair in Psyche and Soma,
professor of psychiatry , and director PTSD research at the University of W estern
Ontario; author of The Impact of Early Life T rauma on Health and Disease“When it comes to understanding the impact of trauma and being able to
continue to grow despite overwhelming life experiences, Bessel van der
Kolk leads the way in his comprehensive knowledge, clinical courage, and
creative strategies to help us heal. The Body Keeps the Scor e  is a cutting-
edge of fering for the general reader to comprehend the complex ef fects of
trauma, and a guide to a wide array of scientifically informed approaches to
not only reduce suf fering, but to move beyond mere survival— and to
thrive.”
—Daniel J. Siegel, MD, clinical professor , UCLA School of Medicine, author of
Brainstorm: The Power and Purpose of the T eenage Brain; Mindsight: The New
Science of Personal T ransformation;  and The Developing Mind: How
Relationships and the Brain Interact to Shape Who W e Ar e
“In this magnificent book, Bessel van der Kolk takes the reader on a
captivating journey that is chock-full of riveting stories of patients and their
struggles interpreted through history , research, and neuroscience made
accessible in the words of a gifted storyteller . W e are privy to the author ’ s
own courageous ef forts to understand and treat trauma over the past forty
years, the results of which have broken new ground and challenged the
status quo of psychiatry and psychotherapy . The Body Keeps the Scor e
leaves us with both a profound appreciation for and a felt sense of the
debilitating ef fects of trauma, along with hope for the future through
fascinating descriptions of novel approaches to treatment. This outstanding
volume is absolutely essential reading not only for therapists but for all who
seek to understand, prevent, or treat the immense suf fering caused by
trauma.”
—Pat Ogden PhD, founder/educational director of the Sensorimotor
Psychotherapy Institute; author of  Sensorimotor Psychotherapy: Interventions
for T rauma and Attachment
“This is masterpiece of powerful understanding and brave heartedness, one
of the most intelligent and helpful works on trauma I have ever read. Dr .
V an der Kolk of fer a brilliant synthesis of clinical cases, neuroscience,
powerful tools and caring humanity , of fering a whole new level of healing
for the traumas carried by so many .”
—Jack Kornfield, author of A Path with HeartVIKING
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) LLC
375 Hudson Street
New Y ork, New Y ork 10014
USA | Canada | UK | Ireland | Australia | New Zealand | India | South Africa | China
penguin.com
A Penguin Random House Company
First published by V iking Penguin, a member of Penguin Group (USA) LLC, 2014
Copyright © 2014 by Bessel van der Kolk
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity , encourages diverse voices, promotes free
speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for
complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any
form without permission. Y ou are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to continue to publish
books for every reader .
L I B R A R Y  O F  C O N G R E S S  C A T A L O G I N G - I N - P U B L I C A T I O N  D A T A
[V an der Kolk, Bessel A., 1943- author .
The body keeps the score : brain, mind, and body in the healing of trauma / Bessel A. van der Kolk.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
eBook ISBN 978-1-101-60830-2
I. T itle.
[DNLM: 1. Stress Disorders, Post-T raumatic—physiopathology . 2. Stress Disorders, Post-T raumatic
—therapy .
WM 172.5]
RC552.P67
616.85'21206—dc23
2014021365
Neither the publisher nor the author is engaged in rendering professional advice or services to the
individual reader . The ideas, procedures, and suggestions contained in this book are not intended as a
substitute for consulting with your physician. All matters regarding your health require medical
supervision. Neither the author nor the publisher shall be liable or responsible for any loss or damage
allegedly arising from any information or suggestion in this book.
V ersion_1T o my patients, who kept the scor e and wer e the textbook.C O N T E N T S
Praise for The Body Keeps the Scor e
T itle Page
Copyright
Dedication
PROLOGUE: F ACING TRAUMA
P AR T ONE:
THE REDISCOVER Y OF TRAUMA
1. LESSONS FROM VIETNAM VETERANS
2. REVOLUTIONS IN UNDERST ANDING MIND AND BRAIN
3. LOOKING INT O THE BRAIN: THE NEUROSCIENCE REVOLUTION
P AR T TWO:
THIS IS YOUR BRAIN ON TRAUMA
4. RUNNING FOR YOUR LIFE: THE ANA T OMY OF SUR VIV AL
5. BODY -BRAIN CONNECTIONS
6. LOSING YOUR BODY , LOSING YOUR SELF
P AR T THREE:
THE MINDS OF CHILDREN
7. GETTING ON THE SAME W A VELENGTH: A TT ACHMENT AND A TTUNEMENT
8. TRAPPED IN RELA TIONSHIPS: THE COST OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT9. WHA T’S LOVE GOT T O DO WITH IT?
10. DEVELOPMENT AL TRAUMA: THE HIDDEN EPIDEMIC
P AR T FOUR:
THE IMPRINT OF TRAUMA
1 1. UNCOVERING SECRETS: THE PROBLEM OF TRAUMA TIC MEMOR Y
12. THE UNBEARABLE HEA VINESS OF REMEMBERING
P AR T FIVE:
P A THS T O RECOVER Y
13. HEALING FROM TRAUMA: OWNING YOUR SELF
14. LANGUAGE: MIRACLE AND TYRANNY
15. LETTING GO OF THE P AST : EMDR
16. LEARNING T O INHABIT YOUR BODY : YOGA
17. PUTTING THE PIECES T OGETHER: SELF-LEADERSHIP
18. FILLING IN THE HOLES: CREA TING STRUCTURES
19. REWIRING THE BRAIN: NEUROFEEDBACK
20. FINDING YOUR VOICE: COMMUNAL RHYTHMS AND THEA TER
EPILOGUE: CHOICES T O BE MADE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
APPENDIX: CONSENSUS PROPOSED CRITERIA FOR DEVELOPMENT AL TRAUMA
DISORDER
RESOURCES
FUR THER READING
NOTES
INDEXOP R O L O G U E
F A C I N G  T R A U M A
ne does not have be a combat soldier , or visit a refugee camp in Syria
or the Congo to encounter trauma. T rauma happens to us, our friends,
our families, and our neighbors. Research by the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention has shown that one in five Americans was sexually
molested as a child; one in four was beaten by a parent to the point of a
mark being left on their body; and one in three couples engages in physical
violence. A quarter of us grew up with alcoholic relatives, and one out of
eight witnessed their mother being beaten or hit.1
As human beings we belong to an extremely resilient species. Since
time immemorial we have rebounded from our relentless wars, countless
disasters (both natural and man-made), and the violence and betrayal in our
own lives. But traumatic experiences do leave traces, whether on a lar ge
scale (on our histories and cultures) or close to home, on our families, with
dark secrets being imperceptibly passed down through generations. They
also leave traces on our minds and emotions, on our capacity for joy and
intimacy , and even on our biology and immune systems.
T rauma af fects not only those who are directly exposed to it, but also
those around them. Soldiers returning home from combat may frighten their
families with their rages and emotional absence. The wives of men who
suf fer from PTSD tend to become depressed, and the children of depressed
mothers are at risk of growing up insecure and anxious. Having been
exposed to family violence as a child often makes it dif ficult to establish
stable, trusting relationships as an adult.T rauma, by definition, is unbearable and intolerable. Most rape victims,
combat soldiers, and children who have been molested become so upset
when they think about what they experienced that they try to push it out of
their minds, trying to act as if nothing happened, and move on. It takes
tremendous ener gy to keep functioning while carrying the memory of terror ,
and the shame of utter weakness and vulnerability .
While we all want to move beyond trauma, the part of our brain that is
devoted to ensuring our survival (deep below our rational brain) is not very
good at denial. Long after a traumatic experience is over , it may be
reactivated at the slightest hint of danger and mobilize disturbed brain
circuits and secrete massive amounts of stress hormones. This precipitates
unpleasant emotions intense physical sensations, and impulsive and
aggressive actions. These posttraumatic reactions feel incomprehensible
and overwhelming. Feeling out of control, survivors of trauma often begin
to fear that they are damaged to the core and beyond redemption.
 • • • 
The first time I remember being drawn to study medicine was at a summer
camp when I was about fourteen years old. My cousin Michael kept me up
all night explaining the intricacies of how kidneys work, how they secrete
the body’ s waste materials and then reabsorb the chemicals that keep the
system in balance. I was riveted by his account of the miraculous way the
body functions. Later , during every stage of my medical training, whether I
was studying sur gery , cardiology , or pediatrics, it was obvious to me that
the key to healing was understanding how the human or ganism works.
When I began my psychiatry rotation, however , I was struck by the contrast
between the incredible complexity of the mind and the ways that we human
beings are connected and attached to one another , and how little
psychiatrists knew about the origins of the problems they were treating.
W ould it be possible one day to know as much about brains, minds, and
love as we do about the other systems that make up our or ganism?
W e are obviously still years from attaining that sort of detailed
understanding, but the birth of three new branches of science has led to an
explosion of knowledge about the ef fects of psychological trauma, abuse,
and neglect. Those new disciplines are neuroscience, the study of how thebrain supports mental processes; developmental psychopathology , the study
of the impact of adverse experiences on the development of mind and brain;
and interpersonal neurobiology , the study of how our behavior influences
the emotions, biology , and mind-sets of those around us.
Research from these new disciplines has revealed that trauma produces
actual physiological changes, including a recalibration of the brain’ s alarm
system, an increase in stress hormone activity , and alterations in the system
that filters relevant information from irrelevant. W e now know that trauma
compromises the brain area that communicates the physical, embodied
feeling of being alive. These changes explain why traumatized individuals
become hypervigilant to threat at the expense of spontaneously engaging in
their day-to-day lives. They also help us understand why traumatized
people so often keep repeating the same problems and have such trouble
learning from experience. W e now know that their behaviors are not the
result of moral failings or signs of lack of willpower or bad character—they
are caused by actual changes in the brain.
This vast increase in our knowledge about the basic processes that
underlie trauma has also opened up new possibilities to palliate or even
reverse the damage. W e can now develop methods and experiences that
utilize the brain’ s own natural neuroplasticity to help survivors feel fully
alive in the present and move on with their lives. There are fundamentally
three avenues: 1) top down, by talking, (re-) connecting with others, and
allowing ourselves to know and understand what is going on with us, while
processing the memories of the trauma; 2) by taking medicines that shut
down inappropriate alarm reactions, or by utilizing other technologies that
change the way the brain or ganizes information, and 3) bottom up: by
allowing the body to have experiences that deeply and viscerally contradict
the helplessness, rage, or collapse that result from trauma. Which one of
these is best for any particular survivor is an empirical question. Most
people I have worked with require a combination.
This has been my life’ s work. In this ef fort I have been supported by
my colleagues and students at the T rauma Center , which I founded thirty
years ago. T ogether we have treated thousands of traumatized children and
adults: victims of child abuse, natural disasters, wars, accidents, and human
traf ficking; people who have suf fered assaults by intimates and strangers.
W e have a long tradition of discussing all our patients in great depth atweekly treatment team meetings and carefully tracking how well dif ferent
forms of treatment work for particular individuals.
Our principal mission has always been to take care of the children and
adults who have come to us for treatment, but from the very beginning we
also have dedicated ourselves to conducting research to explore the ef fects
of traumatic stress on dif ferent populations and to determine what
treatments work for whom. W e have been supported by research grants
from the National Institute of Mental Health, the National Center for
Complementary and Alternative Medicine, the Centers for Disease Control,
and a number of private foundations to study the ef ficacy of many dif ferent
forms of treatment, from medications to talking, yoga, EMDR, theater , and
neurofeedback.
The challenge is: How can people gain control over the residues of past
trauma and return to being masters of their own ship? T alking,
understanding, and human connections help, and drugs can dampen
hyperactive alarm systems. But we will also see that the imprints from the
past can be transformed by having physical experiences that directly
contradict the helplessness, rage, and collapse that are part of trauma, and
thereby regaining self-mastery . I have no preferred treatment modality , as
no single approach fits everybody , but I practice all the forms of treatment
that I discuss in this book. Each one of them can produce profound changes,
depending on the nature of the particular problem and the makeup of the
individual person.
I wrote this book to serve as both a guide and an invitation—an
invitation to dedicate ourselves to facing the reality of trauma, to explore
how best to treat it, and to commit ourselves, as a society , to using every
means we have to prevent it.P AR T ONE
THE REDISCOVER Y
OF TRAUMATC H A P T E R  1
L E S S O N S  F R O M  V I E T N A M
V E T E R A N S
I became what I am today at the age of twelve, on a frigid overcast
day in the winter of 1975. . . . That was a long time ago, but it’ s
wrong what they say about the past. . . . Looking back now , I
realize I have been peeking into that deserted alley for the last
twenty-six years.
—Khaled Hosseini, The Kite Runner
Some people’ s lives seem to flow in a narrative; mine had many
stops and starts. That’ s what trauma does. It interrupts the plot. . . .
It just happens, and then life goes on. No one prepares you for it.
—Jessica Stern, Denial: A Memoir of T error
he T uesday after the Fourth of July weekend, 1978, was my first day as
a staf f psychiatrist at the Boston V eterans Administration Clinic. As I
was hanging a reproduction of my favorite Breughel painting, “The Blind
Leading the Blind,” on the wall of my new of fice, I heard a commotion in
the reception area down the hall. A moment later a lar ge, disheveled man in
a stained three-piece suit, carrying a copy of Soldier of Fortune  magazine
under his arm, burst through my door . He was so agitated and so clearlyhungover that I wondered how I could possibly help this hulking man. I
asked him to take a seat, and tell me what I could do for him.
His name was T om. T en years earlier he had been in the Marines, doing
his service in V ietnam. He had spent the holiday weekend holed up in his
downtown-Boston law of fice, drinking and looking at old photographs,
rather than with his family . He knew from previous years’ experience that
the noise, the fireworks, the heat, and the picnic in his sister ’ s backyard
against the backdrop of dense early-summer foliage, all of which reminded
him of V ietnam, would drive him crazy . When he got upset he was afraid to
be around his family because he behaved like a monster with his wife and
two young boys. The noise of his kids made him so agitated that he would
storm out of the house to keep himself from hurting them. Only drinking
himself into oblivion or riding his Harley-Davidson at dangerously high
speeds helped him to calm down.
Nighttime of fered no relief—his sleep was constantly interrupted by
nightmares about an ambush in a rice paddy back in ’Nam, in which all the
members of his platoon were killed or wounded. He also had terrifying
flashbacks in which he saw dead V ietnamese children. The nightmares were
so horrible that he dreaded falling asleep and he often stayed up for most of
the night, drinking. In the morning his wife would find him passed out on
the living room couch, and she and the boys had to tiptoe around him while
she made them breakfast before taking them to school.
Filling me in on his background, T om said that he had graduated from
high school in 1965, the valedictorian of his class. In line with his family
tradition of military service he enlisted in the Marine Corps immediately
after graduation. His father had served in W orld W ar II in General Patton’ s
army , and T om never questioned his father ’ s expectations. Athletic,
intelligent, and an obvious leader , T om felt powerful and ef fective after
finishing basic training, a member of a team that was prepared for just
about anything. In V ietnam he quickly became a platoon leader , in char ge
of eight other Marines. Surviving slogging through the mud while being
strafed by machine-gun fire can leave people feeling pretty good about
themselves—and their comrades.
At the end of his tour of duty T om was honorably dischar ged, and all he
wanted was to put V ietnam behind him. Outwardly that’ s exactly what he
did. He attended college on the GI Bill, graduated from law school, marriedhis high school sweetheart, and had two sons. T om was upset by how
dif ficult it was to feel any real af fection for his wife, even though her letters
had kept him alive in the madness of the jungle. T om went through the
motions of living a normal life, hoping that by faking it he would learn to
become his old self again. He now had a thriving law practice and a picture-
perfect family , but he sensed he wasn’ t normal; he felt dead inside.
Although T om was the first veteran I had ever encountered on a
professional basis, many aspects of his story were familiar to me. I grew up
in postwar Holland, playing in bombed-out buildings, the son of a man who
had been such an outspoken opponent of the Nazis that he had been sent to
an internment camp. My father never talked about his war experiences, but
he was given to outbursts of explosive rage that stunned me as a little boy .
How could the man I heard quietly going down the stairs every morning to
pray and read the Bible while the rest of the family slept have such a
terrifying temper? How could someone whose life was devoted to the
pursuit of social justice be so filled with anger? I witnessed the same
puzzling behavior in my uncle, who had been captured by the Japanese in
the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia) and sent as a slave laborer to Burma,
where he worked on the famous bridge over the river Kwai. He also rarely
mentioned the war , and he, too, often erupted into uncontrollable rages.
As I listened to T om, I wondered if my uncle and my father had had
nightmares and flashbacks—if they , too, had felt disconnected from their
loved ones and unable to find any real pleasure in their lives. Somewhere in
the back of my mind there must also have been my memories of my
frightened—and often frightening—mother , whose own childhood trauma
was sometimes alluded to and, I now believe, was frequently reenacted. She
had the unnerving habit of fainting when I asked her what her life was like
as a little girl and then blaming me for making her so upset.
Reassured by my obvious interest, T om settled down to tell me just
how scared and confused he was. He was afraid that he was becoming just
like his father , who was always angry and rarely talked with his children—
except to compare them unfavorably with his comrades who had lost their
lives around Christmas 1944, during the Battle of the Bulge.
As the session was drawing to a close, I did what doctors typically do: I
focused on the one part of T om’ s story that I thought I understood—his
nightmares. As a medical student I had worked in a sleep laboratory ,observing people’ s sleep/dream cycles, and had assisted in writing some
articles about nightmares. I had also participated in some early research on
the beneficial ef fects of the psychoactive drugs that were just coming into
use in the 1970s. So, while I lacked a true grasp of the scope of T om’ s
problems, the nightmares were something I could relate to, and as an
enthusiastic believer in better living through chemistry , I prescribed a drug
that we had found to be ef fective in reducing the incidence and severity of
nightmares. I scheduled T om for a follow-up visit two weeks later .
When he returned for his appointment, I eagerly asked T om how the
medicines had worked. He told me he hadn’ t taken any of the pills. T rying
to conceal my irritation, I asked him why . “I realized that if I take the pills
and the nightmares go away ,” he replied, “I will have abandoned my
friends, and their deaths will have been in vain. I need to be a living
memorial to my friends who died in V ietnam.”
I was stunned: T om’ s loyalty to the dead was keeping him from living
his own life, just as his father ’ s devotion to his friends had kept him from
living. Both father ’ s and son’ s experiences on the battlefield had rendered
the rest of their lives irrelevant. How had that happened, and what could we
do about it? That morning I realized I would probably spend the rest of my
professional life trying to unravel the mysteries of trauma. How do horrific
experiences cause people to become hopelessly stuck in the past? What
happens in people’ s minds and brains that keeps them frozen, trapped in a
place they desperately wish to escape? Why did this man’ s war not come to
an end in February 1969, when his parents embraced him at Boston’ s Logan
International Airport after his long flight back from Da Nang?
T om’ s need to live out his life as a memorial to his comrades taught me
that he was suf fering from a condition much more complex than simply
having bad memories or damaged brain chemistry—or altered fear circuits
in the brain. Before the ambush in the rice paddy , T om had been a devoted
and loyal friend, someone who enjoyed life, with many interests and
pleasures. In one terrifying moment, trauma had transformed everything.
During my time at the V A I got to know many men who responded
similarly . Faced with even minor frustrations, our veterans often flew
instantly into extreme rages. The public areas of the clinic were
pockmarked with the impacts of their fists on the drywall, and security was
kept constantly busy protecting claims agents and receptionists fromenraged veterans. Of course, their behavior scared us, but I also was
intrigued.
At home my wife and I were coping with similar problems in our
toddlers, who regularly threw temper tantrums when told to eat their
spinach or to put on warm socks. Why was it, then, that I was utterly
unconcerned about my kids’ immature behavior but deeply worried by what
was going on with the vets (aside from their size, of course, which gave
them the potential to inflict much more harm than my two-footers at
home)? The reason was that I felt perfectly confident that, with proper care,
my kids would gradually learn to deal with frustrations and
disappointments, but I was skeptical that I would be able to help my
veterans reacquire the skills of self-control and self-regulation that they had
lost in the war .
Unfortunately , nothing in my psychiatric training had prepared me to
deal with any of the challenges that T om and his fellow veterans presented.
I went down to the medical library to look for books on war neurosis, shell
shock, battle fatigue, or any other term or diagnosis I could think of that
might shed light on my patients. T o my surprise the library at the V A didn’ t
have a single book about any of these conditions. Five years after the last
American soldier left V ietnam, the issue of wartime trauma was still not on
anybody’ s agenda. Finally , in the Countway Library at Harvard Medical
School, I discovered The T raumatic Neur oses of W ar , which had been
published in 1941 by a psychiatrist named Abram Kardiner . It described
Kardiner ’ s observations of W orld W ar I veterans and had been released in
anticipation of the flood of shell-shocked soldiers expected to be casualties
of W orld W ar II.1
Kardiner reported the same phenomena I was seeing: After the war his
patients were overtaken by a sense of futility; they became withdrawn and
detached, even if they had functioned well before. What Kardiner called
“traumatic neuroses,” today we call posttraumatic stress disorder—PTSD.
Kardiner noted that suf ferers from traumatic neuroses develop a chronic
vigilance for and sensitivity to threat. His summation especially caught my
eye: “The nucleus of the neurosis is a physioneurosis.”2 In other words,
posttraumatic stress isn’ t “all in one’ s head,” as some people supposed, buthas a physiological basis. Kardiner understood even then that the symptoms
have their origin in the entire body’ s response to the original trauma.
Kardiner ’ s description corroborated my own observations, which was
reassuring, but it provided me with little guidance on how to help the
veterans. The lack of literature on the topic was a handicap, but my great
teacher , Elvin Semrad, had taught us to be skeptical about textbooks. W e
had only one real textbook, he said: our patients. W e should trust only what
we could learn from them—and from our own experience. This sounds so
simple, but even as Semrad pushed us to rely upon self-knowledge, he also
warned us how dif ficult that process really is, since human beings are
experts in wishful thinking and obscuring the truth. I remember him saying:
“The greatest sources of our suf fering are the lies we tell ourselves.”
W orking at the V A I soon discovered how excruciating it can be to face
reality . This was true both for my patients and for myself.
W e don’ t really want to know what soldiers go through in combat. W e
do not really want to know how many children are being molested and
abused in our own society or how many couples—almost a third, as it turns
out—engage in violence at some point during their relationship. W e want to
think of families as safe havens in a heartless world and of our own country
as populated by enlightened, civilized people. W e prefer to believe that
cruelty occurs only in faraway places like Darfur or the Congo. It is hard
enough for observers to bear witness to pain. Is it any wonder , then, that the
traumatized individuals themselves cannot tolerate remembering it and that
they often resort to using drugs, alcohol, or self-mutilation to block out their
unbearable knowledge?
T om and his fellow veterans became my first teachers in my quest to
understand how lives are shattered by overwhelming experiences, and in
figuring out how to enable them to feel fully alive again.
TRAUMA AND THE LOSS OF SELF
The first study I did at the V A started with systematically asking veterans
what had happened to them in V ietnam. I wanted to know what had pushed
them over the brink, and why some had broken down as a result of that
experience while others had been able to go on with their lives.3 Most of themen I interviewed had gone to war feeling well prepared, drawn close by
the rigors of basic training and the shared danger . They exchanged pictures
of their families and girlfriends; they put up with one another ’ s flaws. And
they were prepared to risk their lives for their friends. Most of them
confided their dark secrets to a buddy , and some went so far as to share each
other ’ s shirts and socks.
Many of the men had friendships similar to T om’ s with Alex. T om met
Alex, an Italian guy from Malden, Massachusetts, on his first day in
country , and they instantly became close friends. They drove their jeep
together , listened to the same music, and read each other ’ s letters from
home. They got drunk together and chased the same V ietnamese bar girls.
After about three months in country T om led his squad on a foot patrol
through a rice paddy just before sunset. Suddenly a hail of gunfire spurted
from the green wall of the surrounding jungle, hitting the men around him
one by one. T om told me how he had looked on in helpless horror as all the
members of his platoon were killed or wounded in a matter of seconds. He
would never get one image out of his mind: the back of Alex’ s head as he
lay facedown in the rice paddy , his feet in the air . T om wept as he recalled,
“He was the only real friend I ever had.” Afterward, at night, T om
continued to hear the screams of his men and to see their bodies falling into
the water . Any sounds, smells, or images that reminded him of the ambush
(like the popping of firecrackers on the Fourth of July) made him feel just
as paralyzed, terrified, and enraged as he had the day the helicopter
evacuated him from the rice paddy .
Maybe even worse for T om than the recurrent flashbacks of the ambush
was the memory of what happened afterward. I could easily imagine how
T om’ s rage about his friend’ s death had led to the calamity that followed. It
took him months of dealing with his paralyzing shame before he could tell
me about it. Since time immemorial veterans, like Achilles in Homer ’ s
Iliad , have responded to the death of their comrades with unspeakable acts
of revenge. The day after the ambush T om went into a frenzy to a
neighboring village, killing children, shooting an innocent farmer , and
raping a V ietnamese woman. After that it became truly impossible for him
to go home again in any meaningful way . How can you face your
sweetheart and tell her that you brutally raped a woman just like her , or
watch your son take his first step when you are reminded of the child youmurdered? T om experienced the death of Alex as if part of himself had been
forever destroyed—the part that was good and honorable and trustworthy .
T rauma, whether it is the result of something done to you or something you
yourself have done, almost always makes it dif ficult to engage in intimate
relationships. After you have experienced something so unspeakable, how
do you learn to trust yourself or anyone else again? Or , conversely , how can
you surrender to an intimate relationship after you have been brutally
violated?
T om kept showing up faithfully for his appointments, as I had become
for him a lifeline—the father he’d never had, an Alex who had survived the
ambush. It takes enormous trust and courage to allow yourself to remember .
One of the hardest things for traumatized people is to confront their shame
about the way they behaved during a traumatic episode, whether it is
objectively warranted (as in the commission of atrocities) or not (as in the
case of a child who tries to placate her abuser). One of the first people to
write about this phenomenon was Sarah Haley , who occupied an of fice next
to mine at the V A Clinic. In an article entitled “When the Patient Reports
Atrocities,”4 which became a major impetus for the ultimate creation of the
PTSD diagnosis, she discussed the well-nigh intolerable dif ficulty of talking
about (and listening to) the horrendous acts that are often committed by
soldiers in the course of their war experiences. It’ s hard enough to face the
suf fering that has been inflicted by others, but deep down many traumatized
people are even more haunted by the shame they feel about what they
themselves did or did not do under the circumstances. They despise
themselves for how terrified, dependent, excited, or enraged they felt.
In later years I encountered a similar phenomenon in victims of child
abuse: Most of them suf fer from agonizing shame about the actions they
took to survive and maintain a connection with the person who abused
them. This was particularly true if the abuser was someone close to the
child, someone the child depended on, as is so often the case. The result can
be confusion about whether one was a victim or a willing participant, which
in turn leads to bewilderment about the dif ference between love and terror;
pain and pleasure. W e will return to this dilemma throughout this book.
NUMBINGMaybe the worst of T om’ s symptoms was that he felt emotionally numb. He
desperately wanted to love his family , but he just couldn’ t evoke any deep
feelings for them. He felt emotionally distant from everybody , as though his
heart were frozen and he were living behind a glass wall. That numbness
extended to himself, as well. He could not really feel anything except for
his momentary rages and his shame. He described how he hardly
recognized himself when he looked in the mirror to shave. When he heard
himself ar guing a case in court, he would observe himself from a distance
and wonder how this guy , who happened to look and talk like him, was able
to make such cogent ar guments. When he won a case he pretended to be
gratified, and when he lost it was as though he had seen it coming and was
resigned to the defeat even before it happened. Despite the fact that he was
a very ef fective lawyer , he always felt as though he were floating in space,
lacking any sense of purpose or direction.
The only thing that occasionally relieved this feeling of aimlessness
was intense involvement in a particular case. During the course of our
treatment T om had to defend a mobster on a murder char ge. For the
duration of that trial he was totally absorbed in devising a strategy for
winning the case, and there were many occasions on which he stayed up all
night to immerse himself in something that actually excited him. It was like
being in combat, he said—he felt fully alive, and nothing else mattered. The
moment T om won that case, however , he lost his ener gy and sense of
purpose. The nightmares returned, as did his rage attacks—so intensely that
he had to move into a motel to ensure that he would not harm his wife or
children. But being alone, too, was terrifying, because the demons of the
war returned in full force. T om tried to stay busy , working, drinking, and
drugging—doing anything to avoid confronting his demons.
He kept thumbing through Soldier of Fortune,  fantasizing about
enlisting as a mercenary in one of the many regional wars then raging in
Africa. That spring he took out his Harley and roared up the Kancamagus
Highway in New Hampshire. The vibrations, speed, and danger of that ride
helped him pull himself back together , to the point that he was able to leave
his motel room and return to his family .
THE REORGANIZA TION OF PERCEPTIONAnother study I conducted at the V A started out as research about
nightmares but ended up exploring how trauma changes people’ s
perceptions and imagination. Bill, a former medic who had seen heavy
action in V ietnam a decade earlier , was the first person enrolled in my
nightmare study . After his dischar ge he had enrolled in a theological
seminary and had been assigned to his first parish in a Congregational
church in a Boston suburb. He was doing fine until he and his wife had their
first child. Soon after the baby’ s birth, his wife, a nurse, had gone back to
work while he remained at home, working on his weekly sermon and other
parish duties and taking care of their newborn. On the very first day he was
left alone with the baby , it began to cry , and he found himself suddenly
flooded with unbearable images of dying children in V ietnam.
Bill had to call his wife to take over child care and came to the V A in a
panic. He described how he kept hearing the sounds of babies crying and
seeing images of burned and bloody children’ s faces. My medical
colleagues thought that he must surely be psychotic, because the textbooks
of the time said that auditory and visual hallucinations were symptoms of
paranoid schizophrenia. The same texts that provided this diagnosis also
supplied a cause: Bill’ s psychosis was probably triggered by his feeling
displaced in his wife’ s af fections by their new baby .
As I arrived at the intake of fice that day , I saw Bill surrounded by
worried doctors who were preparing to inject him with a powerful
antipsychotic drug and ship him of f to a locked ward. They described his
symptoms and asked my opinion. Having worked in a previous job on a
ward specializing in the treatment of schizophrenics, I was intrigued.
Something about the diagnosis didn’ t sound right. I asked Bill if I could talk
with him, and after hearing his story , I unwittingly paraphrased something
Sigmund Freud had said about trauma in 1895: “I think this man is
suf fering from memories.” I told Bill that I would try to help him and, after
of fering him some medications to control his panic, asked if he would be
willing to come back a few days later to participate in my nightmare study .5
He agreed.
As part of that study we gave our participants a Rorschach test.6 Unlike
tests that require answers to straightforward questions, responses to the
Rorschach are almost impossible to fake. The Rorschach provides us with aunique way to observe how people construct a mental image from what is
basically a meaningless stimulus: a blot of ink. Because humans are
meaning-making creatures, we have a tendency to create some sort of
image or story out of those inkblots, just as we do when we lie in a meadow
on a beautiful summer day and see images in the clouds floating high
above. What people make out of these blots can tell us a lot about how their
minds work.
On seeing the second card of the Rorschach test, Bill exclaimed in
horror , “This is that child that I saw being blown up in V ietnam. In the
middle, you see the charred flesh, the wounds, and the blood is spurting out
all over .” Panting and with sweat beading on his forehead, he was in a panic
similar to the one that had initially brought him to the V A clinic. Although I
had heard veterans describing their flashbacks, this was the first time I
actually witnessed one. In that very moment in my of fice, Bill was
obviously seeing the same images, smelling the same smells, and feeling
the same physical sensations he had felt during the original event. T en years
after helplessly holding a dying baby in his arms, Bill was reliving the
trauma in response to an inkblot.
Experiencing Bill’ s flashback firsthand in my of fice helped me realize
the agony that regularly visited the veterans I was trying to treat and helped
me appreciate again how critical it was to find a solution. The traumatic
event itself, however horrendous, had a beginning, a middle, and an end,
but I now saw that flashbacks could be even worse. Y ou never know when
you will be assaulted by them again and you have no way of telling when
they will stop. It took me years to learn how to ef fectively treat flashbacks,
and in this process Bill turned out to be one of my most important mentors.
When we gave the Rorschach test to twenty-one additional veterans,
the response was consistent: Sixteen of them, on seeing the second card,
reacted as if they were experiencing a wartime trauma. The second
Rorschach card is the first card that contains color and often elicits so-
called color shock in response. The veterans interpreted this card with
descriptions like “These are the bowels of my friend Jim after a mortar shell
ripped him open” and “This is the neck of my friend Danny after his head
was blown of f by a shell while we were eating lunch.” None of them
mentioned dancing monks, fluttering butterflies, men on motorcycles, orany of the other ordinary , sometimes whimsical images that most people
see.
While the majority of the veterans were greatly upset by what they saw ,
the reactions of the remaining five were even more alarming: They simply
went blank. “This is nothing,” one observed, “just a bunch of ink.” They
were right, of course, but the normal human response to ambiguous stimuli
is to use our imagination to read something into them.
W e learned from these Rorschach tests that traumatized people have a
tendency to superimpose their trauma on everything around them and have
trouble deciphering whatever is going on around them. There appeared to
be little in between. W e also learned that trauma af fects the imagination.
The five men who saw nothing in the blots had lost the capacity to let their
minds play . But so, too, had the other sixteen men, for in viewing scenes
from the past in those blots they were not displaying the mental flexibility
that is the hallmark of imagination. They simply kept replaying an old reel.
Imagination is absolutely critical to the quality of our lives. Our
imagination enables us to leave our routine everyday existence by
fantasizing about travel, food, sex, falling in love, or having the last word—
all the things that make life interesting. Imagination gives us the
opportunity to envision new possibilities—it is an essential launchpad for
making our hopes come true. It fires our creativity , relieves our boredom,
alleviates our pain, enhances our pleasure, and enriches our most intimate
relationships. When people are compulsively and constantly pulled back
into the past, to the last time they felt intense involvement and deep
emotions, they suf fer from a failure of imagination, a loss of the mental
flexibility . W ithout imagination there is no hope, no chance to envision a
better future, no place to go, no goal to reach.
The Rorschach tests also taught us that traumatized people look at the
world in a fundamentally dif ferent way from other people. For most of us a
man coming down the street is just someone taking a walk. A rape victim,
however , may see a person who is about to molest her and go into a panic.
A stern schoolteacher may be an intimidating presence to an average kid,
but for a child whose stepfather beats him up, she may represent a torturer
and precipitate a rage attack or a terrified cowering in the corner .STUCK IN TRAUMA
Our clinic was inundated with veterans seeking psychiatric help. However ,
because of an acute shortage of qualified doctors, all we could do was put
most of them on a waiting list, even as they continued brutalizing
themselves and their families. W e began seeing a sharp increase in arrests
of veterans for violent of fenses and drunken brawls—as well as an alarming
number of suicides. I received permission to start a group for young
V ietnam veterans to serve as a sort of holding tank until “real” therapy
could start.
At the opening session for a group of former Marines, the first man to
speak flatly declared, “I do not want to talk about the war .” I replied that the
members could discuss anything they wanted. After half an hour of
excruciating silence, one veteran finally started to talk about his helicopter
crash. T o my amazement the rest immediately came to life, speaking with
great intensity about their traumatic experiences. All of them returned the
following week and the week after . In the group they found resonance and
meaning in what had previously been only sensations of terror and
emptiness. They felt a renewed sense of the comradeship that had been so
vital to their war experience. They insisted that I had to be part of their
newfound unit and gave me a Marine captain’ s uniform for my birthday . In
retrospect that gesture revealed part of the problem: Y ou were either in or
out—you either belonged to the unit or you were nobody . After trauma the
world becomes sharply divided between those who know and those who
don’ t. People who have not shared the traumatic experience cannot be
trusted, because they can’ t understand it. Sadly , this often includes spouses,
children, and co-workers.
Later I led another group, this time for veterans of Patton’ s army—men
now well into their seventies, all old enough to be my father . W e met on
Monday mornings at eight o’clock. In Boston winter snowstorms
occasionally paralyze the public transit system, but to my amazement all of
them showed up even during blizzards, some of them trudging several miles
through the snow to reach the V A Clinic. For Christmas they gave me a
1940s GI-issue wristwatch. As had been the case with my group of
Marines, I could not be their doctor unless they made me one of them.Moving as these experiences were, the limits of group therapy became
clear when I ur ged the men to talk about the issues they confronted in their
daily lives: their relationships with their wives, children, girlfriends, and
family; dealing with their bosses and finding satisfaction in their work; their
heavy use of alcohol. Their typical response was to balk and resist and
instead recount yet again how they had plunged a dagger through the heart
of a German soldier in the Hürtgen Forest or how their helicopter had been
shot down in the jungles of V ietnam.
Whether the trauma had occurred ten years in the past or more than
forty , my patients could not bridge the gap between their wartime
experiences and their current lives. Somehow the very event that caused
them so much pain had also become their sole source of meaning. They felt
fully alive only when they were revisiting their traumatic past.
DIAGNOSING POSTTRAUMA TIC STRESS
In those early days at the V A, we labeled our veterans with all sorts of
diagnoses—alcoholism, substance abuse, depression, mood disorder , even
schizophrenia—and we tried every treatment in our textbooks. But for all
our ef forts it became clear that we were actually accomplishing very little.
The powerful drugs we prescribed often left the men in such a fog that they
could barely function. When we encouraged them to talk about the precise
details of a traumatic event, we often inadvertently triggered a full-blown
flashback, rather than helping them resolve the issue. Many of them
dropped out of treatment because we were not only failing to help but also
sometimes making things worse.
A turning point arrived in 1980, when a group of V ietnam veterans,
aided by the New Y ork psychoanalysts Chaim Shatan and Robert J. Lifton,
successfully lobbied the American Psychiatric Association to create a new
diagnosis: posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), which described a cluster
of symptoms that was common, to a greater or lesser extent, to all of our
veterans. Systematically identifying the symptoms and grouping them
together into a disorder finally gave a name to the suf fering of people who
were overwhelmed by horror and helplessness. W ith the conceptual
framework of PTSD in place, the stage was set for a radical change in ourunderstanding of our patients. This eventually led to an explosion of
research and attempts at finding ef fective treatments.
Inspired by the possibilities presented by this new diagnosis, I proposed
a study on the biology of traumatic memories to the V A. Did the memories
of those suf fering from PTSD dif fer from those of others? For most people
the memory of an unpleasant event eventually fades or is transformed into
something more benign. But most of our patients were unable to make their
past into a story that happened long ago.7
The opening line of the grant rejection read: “It has never been shown
that PTSD is relevant to the mission of the V eterans Administration.” Since
then, of course, the mission of the V A has become or ganized around the
diagnosis of PTSD and brain injury , and considerable resources are
dedicated to applying “evidence-based treatments” to traumatized war
veterans. But at the time things were dif ferent and, unwilling to keep
working in an or ganization whose view of reality was so at odds with my
own, I handed in my resignation; in 1982 I took a position at the
Massachusetts Mental Health Center , the Harvard teaching hospital where I
had trained to become a psychiatrist. My new responsibility was to teach a
fledgling area of study: psychopharmacology , the administration of drugs to
alleviate mental illness.
In my new job I was confronted on an almost daily basis with issues I
thought I had left behind at the V A. My experience with combat veterans
had so sensitized me to the impact of trauma that I now listened with a very
dif ferent ear when depressed and anxious patients told me stories of
molestation and family violence. I was particularly struck by how many
female patients spoke of being sexually abused as children. This was
puzzling, as the standard textbook of psychiatry at the time stated that incest
was extremely rare in the United States, occurring about once in every
million women.8 Given that there were then only about one hundred million
women living in the United States, I wondered how forty seven, almost half
of them, had found their way to my of fice in the basement of the hospital.
Furthermore, the textbook said, “There is little agreement about the role
of father -daughter incest as a source of serious subsequent
psychopathology .” My patients with incest histories were hardly free of
“subsequent psychopathology”—they were profoundly depressed,confused, and often engaged in bizarrely self-harmful behaviors, such as
cutting themselves with razor blades. The textbook went on to practically
endorse incest, explaining that “such incestuous activity diminishes the
subject’ s chance of psychosis and allows for a better adjustment to the
external world.”9 In fact, as it turned out, incest had devastating ef fects on
women’ s well-being.
In many ways these patients were not so dif ferent from the veterans I
had just left behind at the V A. They also had nightmares and flashbacks.
They also alternated between occasional bouts of explosive rage and long
periods of being emotionally shut down. Most of them had great dif ficulty
getting along with other people and had trouble maintaining meaningful
relationships.
As we now know , war is not the only calamity that leaves human lives
in ruins. While about a quarter of the soldiers who serve in war zones are
expected to develop serious posttraumatic problems,10 the majority of
Americans experience a violent crime at some time during their lives, and
more accurate reporting has revealed that twelve million women in the
United States have been victims of rape. More than half of all rapes occur in
girls below age fifteen.1 1 For many people the war begins at home: Each
year about three million children in the United States are reported as
victims of child abuse and neglect. One million of these cases are serious
and credible enough to force local child protective services or the courts to
take action.12 In other words, for every soldier who serves in a war zone
abroad, there are ten children who are endangered in their own homes. This
is particularly tragic, since it is very dif ficult for growing children to
recover when the source of terror and pain is not enemy combatants but
their own caretakers.
A NEW UNDERST ANDING
In the three decades since I met T om, we have learned an enormous amount
not only about the impact and manifestations of trauma but also about ways
to help traumatized people find their way back. Since the early 1990s brain-
imaging tools have started to show us what actually happens inside the
brains of traumatized people. This has proven essential to understanding thedamage inflicted by trauma and has guided us to formulate entirely new
avenues of repair .
W e have also begun to understand how overwhelming experiences
af fect our innermost sensations and our relationship to our physical reality
—the core of who we are. W e have learned that trauma is not just an event
that took place sometime in the past; it is also the imprint left by that
experience on mind, brain, and body . This imprint has ongoing
consequences for how the human or ganism manages to survive in the
present.
T rauma results in a fundamental reor ganization of the way mind and
brain manage perceptions. It changes not only how we think and what we
think about, but also our very capacity to think. W e have discovered that
helping victims of trauma find the words to describe what has happened to
them is profoundly meaningful, but usually it is not enough. The act of
telling the story doesn’ t necessarily alter the automatic physical and
hormonal responses of bodies that remain hypervigilant, prepared to be
assaulted or violated at any time. For real change to take place, the body
needs to learn that the danger has passed and to live in the reality of the
present. Our search to understand trauma has led us to think dif ferently not
only about the structure of the mind but also about the processes by which it
heals.IC H A P T E R  2
R E V O L U T I O N S  I N  U N D E R S T A N D I N G
M I N D  A N D  B R A I N
The greater the doubt, the greater the awakening; the smaller the
doubt, the smaller the awakening. No doubt, no awakening.
—C.-C. Chang, The Practice of Zen
Y ou live through that little piece of time that is yours, but that
piece of time is not only your own life, it is the summing-up of all
the other lives that are simultaneous with yours. . . . What you are
is an expression of History .
—Robert Penn W arr en, W orld Enough and T ime
n the late 1960s, during a year of f between my first and second years of
medical school, I became an accidental witness to a profound transition
in the medical approach to mental suf fering. I had landed a plum job as an
attendant on a research ward at the Massachusetts Mental Health Center ,
where I was in char ge of or ganizing recreational activities for the patients.
MMHC had long been considered one of the finest psychiatric hospitals in
the country , a jewel in the crown of the Harvard Medical School teaching
empire. The goal of the research on my ward was to determine whether
psychotherapy or medication was the best way to treat young people who
had suf fered a first mental breakdown diagnosed as schizophrenia.The talking cure, an of fshoot of Freudian psychoanalysis, was still the
primary treatment for mental illness at MMHC. However , in the early 1950s
a group of French scientists had discovered a new compound,
chlorpromazine (sold under the brand name Thorazine), that could
“tranquilize” patients and make them less agitated and delusional. That
inspired hope that drugs could be developed to treat serious mental
problems such as depression, panic, anxiety , and mania, as well as to
manage some of the most disturbing symptoms of schizophrenia.
As an attendant I had nothing to do with the research aspect of the ward
and was never told what treatment any of the patients was receiving. They
were all close to my age—college students from Harvard, MIT , and Boston
University . Some had tried to kill themselves; others cut themselves with
knives or razor blades; several had attacked their roommates or had
otherwise terrified their parents or friends with their unpredictable,
irrational behavior . My job was to keep them involved in normal activities
for college students, such as eating at the local pizza parlor , camping in a
nearby state forest, attending Red Sox games, and sailing on the Charles
River .
T otally new to the field, I sat in rapt attention during ward meetings,
trying to decipher the patients’ complicated speech and logic. I also had to
learn to deal with their irrational outbursts and terrified withdrawal. One
morning I found a patient standing like a statue in her bedroom with one
arm raised in a defensive gesture, her face frozen in fear . She remained
there, immobile, for at least twelve hours. The doctors gave me the name
for her condition, catatonia, but even the textbooks I consulted didn’ t tell
me what could be done about it. W e just let it run its course.
TRAUMA BEFORE DA WN
I spent many nights and weekends on the unit, which exposed me to things
the doctors never saw during their brief visits. When patients could not
sleep, they often wandered in their tightly wrapped bathrobes into the
darkened nursing station to talk. The quiet of the night seemed to help them
open up, and they told me stories about having been hit, assaulted, or
molested, often by their own parents, sometimes by relatives, classmates, orneighbors. They shared memories of lying in bed at night, helpless and
terrified, hearing their mother being beaten by their father or a boyfriend,
hearing their parents yell horrible threats at each other , hearing the sounds
of furniture breaking. Others told me about fathers who came home drunk
—hearing their footsteps on the landing and how they waited for them to
come in, pull them out of bed, and punish them for some imagined of fense.
Several of the women recalled lying awake, motionless, waiting for the
inevitable—a brother or father coming in to molest them.
During morning rounds the young doctors presented their cases to their
supervisors, a ritual that the ward attendants were allowed to observe in
silence. They rarely mentioned stories like the ones I’d heard. However ,
many later studies have confirmed the relevance of those midnight
confessions: W e now know that more than half the people who seek
psychiatric care have been assaulted, abandoned, neglected, or even raped
as children, or have witnessed violence in their families.1 But such
experiences seemed to be of f the table during rounds.  I was often surprised
by the dispassionate way patients’ symptoms were discussed and by how
much time was spent on trying to manage their suicidal thoughts and self-
destructive behaviors, rather than on understanding the possible causes of
their despair and helplessness. I was also struck by how little attention was
paid to their accomplishments and aspirations; whom they cared for , loved,
or hated; what motivated and engaged them, what kept them stuck, and
what made them feel at peace—the ecology of their lives.
A few years later , as a young doctor , I was confronted with  an
especially stark example of the medical model in action. I was then
moonlighting at a Catholic hospital, doing physical examinations on women
who’d been admitted to receive electroshock treatment for depression.
Being my curious immigrant self, I’d look up from their charts to  ask them
about their lives. Many of them spilled out stories about painful marriages,
dif ficult children, and guilt over abortions.  As they spoke, they visibly
brightened and often thanked me ef fusively for listening to them. Some of
them wondered if they really still needed electroshock after having gotten
so much of f their chests. I always felt sad at the end of these meetings,
knowing that the treatments that would be administered the followingmorning would erase all memory of our conversation. I did not last long in
that job.
On my days of f from the ward at MMHC, I often went to the Countway
Library of Medicine to learn more about the patients I was supposed to
help. One Saturday afternoon I came across a treatise that is still  revered
today:  Eugen Bleuler ’ s 191 1 textbook Dementia Praecox . Bleuler ’ s
observations were fascinating:
Among schizophrenic body hallucinations, the sexual ones are by
far the most frequent and the most important. All the raptures and
joys of normal and abnormal sexual satisfaction are experienced
by these patients, but even more frequently every obscene and
disgusting practice which the most extravagant fantasy can conjure
up. Male patients have their semen drawn of f; painful erections are
stimulated. The women patients are raped and injured in the most
devilish ways. . . . In spite of the symbolic meaning of many such
hallucinations, the majority of them correspond to real sensations.2
This made me wonder: Our patients had hallucinations—the doctors
routinely asked about them and noted them as signs of how disturbed the
patients were. But if the stories I’d heard in the wee hours were true, could
it be that these “hallucinations” were in fact the fragmented memories of
real experiences? W ere hallucinations just the concoctions of sick brains?
Could people make up physical sensations they had never experienced?
W as there a clear line between creativity and pathological imagination?
Between memory and imagination? These questions remain unanswered to
this day , but research has shown that people who’ve been abused as
children often feel sensations (such as abdominal pain) that have no obvious
physical cause; they hear voices warning of danger or accusing them of
heinous crimes.
There was no question that many patients on the ward engaged in
violent, bizarre, and self-destructive behaviors, particularly when they felt
frustrated, thwarted, or misunderstood. They threw temper tantrums, hurled
plates, smashed windows, and cut themselves with shards of glass. At that
time I had no idea why someone might react to a simple request (“Let meclean that goop out of your hair”) with rage or terror . I usually followed the
lead of the experienced nurses, who signaled when to back of f or , if that did
not work, to restrain a patient. I was surprised and alarmed by the
satisfaction I sometimes felt after I’d wrestled a patient to the floor so a
nurse could give an injection, and I gradually realized how much of our
professional training was geared to helping us stay in control in the face of
terrifying and confusing realities.
Sylvia was a gor geous nineteen-year -old Boston University student
who usually sat alone in the corner of the ward, looking frightened to death
and virtually mute, but whose reputation as the girlfriend of an important
Boston mafioso gave her an aura of mystery . After she refused to eat for
more than a week and rapidly started to lose weight, the doctors decided to
force-feed her . It took three of us to hold her down, another to push the
rubber feeding tube down her throat, and a nurse to pour the liquid nutrients
into her stomach. Later , during a midnight confession, Sylvia spoke timidly
and hesitantly about her childhood sexual abuse by her brother and uncle. I
realized then our display of “caring” must have felt to her much like a gang
rape. This experience, and others like it, helped me formulate this rule for
my students: If you do something to a patient that you would not do to your
friends or children, consider whether you are unwittingly replicating a
trauma from the patient’ s past.
In my role as recreation leader I noticed other things: As a group the
patients were strikingly clumsy and physically uncoordinated. When we
went camping, most of them stood helplessly by as I pitched the tents. W e
almost capsized once in a squall on the Charles River because they huddled
rigidly in the lee, unable to grasp that they needed to shift position to
balance the boat. In volleyball games the staf f members invariably were
much better coordinated than the patients. Another characteristic they
shared was that even their most relaxed conversations seemed stilted,
lacking the natural flow of gestures and facial expressions that are typical
among friends. The relevance of these observations became clear only after
I’d met the body-based therapists Peter Levine and Pat Ogden; in the later
chapters I’ll have a lot to say about how trauma is held in people’ s bodies.
MAKING SENSE OF SUFFERINGAfter my year on the research ward I resumed medical school and then, as a
newly minted MD, returned to MMHC to be trained as a psychiatrist, a
program to which I was thrilled to be accepted. Many famous psychiatrists
had trained there, including Eric Kandel, who later won the Nobel Prize in
Physiology and Medicine. Allan Hobson discovered the brain cells
responsible for the generation of dreams in a lab in the hospital basement
while I trained there, and the first studies on the chemical underpinnings of
depression were also conducted at MMHC. But for many of us residents,
the greatest draw was the patients. W e spent six hours each day with them
and then met as a group with senior psychiatrists to share our observations,
pose our questions, and compete to make the wittiest remarks.
Our great teacher , Elvin Semrad, actively discouraged us from reading
psychiatry textbooks during our first year . (This intellectual starvation diet
may account for the fact that most of us later became voracious readers and
prolific writers.) Semrad did not want our perceptions of reality to become
obscured by the pseudocertainties of psychiatric diagnoses. I remember
asking him once: “What would you call this patient—schizophrenic or
schizoaf fective?” He paused and stroked his chin, apparently in deep
thought. “I think I’d call him Michael McIntyre,” he replied.
Semrad taught us that most human suf fering is related to love and loss
and that the job of therapists is to help people “acknowledge, experience,
and bear” the reality of life—with all its pleasures and heartbreak. “The
greatest sources of our suf fering are the lies we tell ourselves,” he’d say ,
ur ging us to be honest with ourselves about every facet of our experience.
He often said that people can never get better without knowing what they
know and feeling what they feel.
I remember being surprised to hear this distinguished old Harvard
professor confess how comforted he was to feel his wife’ s bum against him
as he fell asleep at night. By disclosing such simple human needs in himself
he helped us recognize how basic they were to our lives. Failure to attend to
them results in a stunted existence, no matter how lofty our thoughts and
worldly accomplishments. Healing, he told us, depends on experiential
knowledge: Y ou can be fully in char ge of your life only if you can
acknowledge the reality of your body , in all its visceral dimensions.
Our profession, however , was moving in a dif ferent direction. In 1968
the American Journal of Psychiatry  had published the results of the studyfrom the ward where I’d been an attendant. They showed unequivocally
that schizophrenic patients who received drugs alone had a better outcome
than those who talked three times a week with the best therapists in
Boston.3 This study was one of many milestones on a road that gradually
changed how medicine and psychiatry approached psychological problems:
from infinitely variable expressions of intolerable feelings and relationships
to a brain-disease model of discrete “disorders.”
The way medicine approaches human suf fering has always been
determined by the technology available at any given time. Before the
Enlightenment aberrations in behavior were ascribed to God, sin, magic,
witches, and evil spirits. It was only in the nineteenth century that scientists
in France and Germany began to investigate behavior  as an adaptation to
the  complexities of the world. Now a new paradigm was emer ging: Anger ,
lust, pride, greed, avarice, and sloth—as well as all the other problems we
humans have always struggled to manage—were recast as “disorders” that
could be fixed by the administration of appropriate chemicals.4 Many
psychiatrists were relieved and delighted to become “real scientists,” just
like their med school classmates who had laboratories, animal experiments,
expensive equipment, and complicated diagnostic tests, and set aside the
wooly-headed theories of philosophers like Freud and Jung. A major
textbook of psychiatry went so far as to state: “The cause of mental illness
is now considered an aberration of the brain, a chemical imbalance.”5
Like my colleagues, I eagerly embraced the pharmacological
revolution. In 1973 I became the first chief resident in psychopharmacology
at MMHC. I may also have been the first psychiatrist in Boston to
administer lithium to a manic-depressive patient. (I’d read about John
Cade’ s work with lithium in Australia, and I received permission from a
hospital committee to try it.) On lithium a woman who had been manic
every May for the past thirty-five years, and suicidally depressed every
November , stopped cycling and remained stable for the three years she was
under my care. I was also part of the first U.S. research team to test the
antipsychotic Clozaril on chronic patients who were warehoused in the back
wards of the old insane asylums.6 Some of their responses were miraculous:
People who had spent much of their lives locked in their own separate,
terrifying realities were now able to return to their families andcommunities; patients mired in darkness and despair started to respond to
the beauty of human contact and the pleasures of work and play . These
amazing results made us optimistic that we could finally conquer human
misery .
Antipsychotic drugs were a major factor in reducing the number of
people living in mental hospitals in the United States, from over 500,000 in
1955 to fewer than 100,000 in 1996.7 For people today who did not know
the world before the advent of these treatments, the change is almost
unimaginable. As a first-year medical student I visited Kankakee State
Hospital in Illinois and saw a burly ward attendant hose down dozens of
filthy , naked, incoherent patients in an unfurnished dayroom supplied with
gutters for the runof f water . This memory now seems more like a nightmare
than like something I witnessed with my own eyes. My first job after
finishing my residency in 1974 was as the second-to-last director of a once-
venerable institution, the Boston State Hospital, which had formerly housed
thousands of patients and been spread over hundreds of acres with dozens
of buildings, including greenhouses, gardens, and workshops—most of
them by then in ruins. During my time there patients were gradually
dispersed into “the community ,” the blanket term for the anonymous
shelters and nursing homes where most of them ended up. (Ironically , the
hospital was started as an “asylum,” a word meaning “sanctuary” that
gradually took on a sinister connotation. It actually did of fer a sheltered
community where everybody knew the patients’ names and idiosyncrasies.)
In 1979, shortly after I went to work at the V A, the Boston State Hospital’ s
gates were permanently locked, and it became a ghost town.
During my time at Boston State I continued to work in the MMHC
psychopharmacology lab, which was now focusing on another direction for
research. In the 1960s scientists at the National Institutes of Health had
begun to develop techniques for isolating and measuring hormones and
neurotransmitters in blood and the brain. Neurotransmitters are chemical
messengers that carry information from neuron to neuron, enabling us to
engage ef fectively with the world.
Now that scientists were finding evidence that abnormal levels of
norepinephrine were associated with depression, and of dopamine with
schizophrenia, there was hope that we could develop drugs that tar getspecific brain abnormalities. That hope was never fully realized, but our
ef forts to measure how drugs could af fect mental symptoms led to another
profound change in the profession. Researchers’ need for a precise and
systematic way to communicate their findings resulted in the development
of the so-called Research Diagnostic Criteria, to which I contributed as a
lowly research assistant. These eventually became the basis for the first
systematic system to diagnose psychiatric problems, the American
Psychiatric Association’ s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disor ders  (DSM), which is commonly referred to as the “bible of
psychiatry .” The foreword to the landmark 1980 DSM-III was appropriately
modest and acknowledged that this diagnostic system was imprecise—so
imprecise that it never should be used for forensic or insurance purposes.8
As we will see, that modesty was tragically short-lived.
INESCAP ABLE SHOCK
Preoccupied with so many lingering questions about traumatic stress, I
became intrigued with the idea that the nascent field of neuroscience could
provide some answers and started to attend the meetings of the American
College of Neuropsychopharmacology (ACNP). In 1984 the ACNP of fered
many fascinating lectures about drug development, but it was not until a
few hours before my scheduled flight back to Boston that I heard a
presentation by Steven Maier of the University of Colorado, who had
collaborated with Martin Seligman of the University of Pennsylvania. His
topic was learned helplessness in animals. Maier and Seligman had
repeatedly administered painful electric shocks to dogs who were trapped in
locked cages. They called this condition “inescapable shock.”9 Being a dog
lover , I realized that I could never have done such research myself, but I
was curious about how this cruelty would af fect the animals.
After administering several courses of electric shock, the researchers
opened the doors of the cages and then shocked the dogs again. A group of
control dogs who had never been shocked before immediately ran away , but
the dogs who had earlier been subjected to inescapable shock made no
attempt to flee, even when the door was wide open—they just lay there,
whimpering and defecating. The mere opportunity to escape does notnecessarily make traumatized animals, or people, take the road to freedom.
Like Maier and Seligman’ s dogs, many traumatized people simply give up.
Rather than risk experimenting with new options they stay stuck in the fear
they know .
I was riveted by Maier ’ s account. What they had done to these poor
dogs was exactly what had happened to my traumatized human patients.
They , too, had been exposed to somebody (or something) who had inflicted
terrible harm on them—harm they had no way of escaping. I made a rapid
mental review of the patients I had treated. Almost all had in some way
been trapped or immobilized, unable to take action to stave of f the
inevitable. Their fight/flight response had been thwarted, and the result was
either extreme agitation or collapse.
Maier and Seligman also found that traumatized dogs secreted much
lar ger amounts of stress hormones than was normal. This supported what
we were beginning to learn about the biological underpinnings of traumatic
stress. A group of young researchers, among them Steve Southwick and
John Krystal at Y ale, Arieh Shalev at Hadassah Medical School in
Jerusalem, Frank Putnam at the National Institute of Mental Health
(NIMH), and Roger Pitman, later at Harvard, were all finding that
traumatized people keep secreting lar ge amounts of stress hormones long
after the actual danger has passed, and Rachel Y ehuda at Mount Sinai in
New Y ork confronted us with her seemingly paradoxical findings that the
levels of the stress hormone cortisol are low in PTSD. Her discoveries only
started to make sense when her research clarified that cortisol puts an end to
the stress response by sending an all-safe signal, and that, in PTSD, the
body’ s stress hormones do, in fact, not return to baseline after the threat has
passed.
Ideally our stress hormone system should provide a lightning-fast
response to threat, but then quickly return us to equilibrium. In PTSD
patients, however , the stress hormone system fails at this balancing act.
Fight/flight/freeze signals continue after the danger is over , and, as in the
case of the dogs, do not return to normal. Instead, the continued secretion of
stress hormones is expressed as agitation and panic and, in the long term,
wreaks havoc with their health.
I missed my plane that day because I had to talk with Steve Maier . His
workshop of fered clues not only about the underlying problems of mypatients but also potential keys to their resolution. For example, he and
Seligman had found that the only way to teach the traumatized dogs to get
of f the electric grids when the doors were open was to repeatedly drag them
out of their cages so they could physically experience how they could get
away . I wondered if we also could help my patients with their fundamental
orientation that there was nothing they could do to defend themselves? Did
my patients also need to have physical  experiences to restore a visceral
sense of control? What if they could be taught to physically move to escape
a potentially threatening situation that was similar to the trauma in which
they had been trapped and immobilized? As I will discuss in the treatment
part 5 of this book, that was one of the conclusions I eventually reached.
Further animal studies involving mice, rats, cats, monkeys, and
elephants brought more intriguing data.10 For example, when researchers
played a loud, intrusive sound, mice that had been raised in a warm nest
with plenty of food scurried home immediately . But another group, raised in
a noisy nest with scarce food supplies, also ran for home, even after
spending time in more pleasant surroundings.1 1
Scared animals return home, regardless of whether home is safe or
frightening. I thought about my patients with abusive families who kept
going back to be hurt again. Are traumatized people condemned to seek
refuge in what is familiar? If so, why , and is it possible to help them
become attached to places and activities that are safe and pleasurable?12
ADDICTED T O TRAUMA: THE P AIN OF PLEASURE AND
THE PLEASURE OF P AIN
One of the things that struck my colleague Mark Greenber g and me when
we ran therapy groups for V ietnam combat veterans was how , despite their
feelings of horror and grief, many of them seemed to come to life when
they talked about their helicopter crashes and their dying comrades.
(Former New Y ork T imes  correspondent Chris Hedges, who covered a
number of brutal conflicts, entitled his book W ar Is a For ce That Gives Us
Meaning .13) Many traumatized people seem to seek out experiences that
would repel most of us,14 and patients often complain about a vague senseof emptiness and boredom when they are not angry , under duress, or
involved in some dangerous activity .
My patient Julia was brutally raped at gunpoint in a hotel room at age
sixteen. Shortly thereafter she got involved with a violent pimp who
prostituted her . He regularly beat her up. She was repeatedly jailed for
prostitution, but she always went back to her pimp. Finally her grandparents
intervened and paid for an intense rehab program. After she successfully
completed inpatient treatment, she started working as a receptionist and
taking courses at a local college. In her sociology class she wrote a term
paper about the liberating possibilities of prostitution, for which she read
the memoirs of several famous prostitutes. She gradually dropped all her
other courses. A brief relationship with a classmate quickly went sour—he
bored her to tears, she said, and she was repelled by his boxer shorts. She
then picked up an addict on the subway who first beat her up and then
started to stalk her . She finally became motivated to return to treatment
when she was once again severely beaten.
Freud had a term for such traumatic reenactments: “the compulsion to
repeat.” He and many of his followers believed that reenactments were an
unconscious attempt to get control over a painful situation and that they
eventually could lead to mastery and resolution. There is no evidence for
that theory—repetition leads only to further pain and self-hatred. In fact,
even reliving the trauma repeatedly in therapy may reinforce preoccupation
and fixation.
Mark Greenber g and I decided to learn more about attractors—the
things that draw us, motivate us, and make us feel alive. Normally attractors
are meant to make us feel better . So, why are so many people attracted to
dangerous or painful situations? W e eventually found a study that explained
how activities that cause fear or pain can later become thrilling
experiences.15 In the 1970s Richard Solomon of the University of
Pennsylvania had shown that the body learns to adjust to all sorts of stimuli.
W e may get hooked on recreational drugs because they right away make us
feel so good, but activities like sauna bathing, marathon running, or
parachute jumping, which initially cause discomfort and even terror , can
ultimately become very enjoyable. This gradual adjustment signals that a
new chemical balance has been established within the body , so thatmarathon runners, say , get a sense of well-being and exhilaration from
pushing their bodies to the limit.
At this point, just as with drug addiction, we start to crave the activity
and experience withdrawal when it’ s not available. In the long run people
become more preoccupied with the pain of withdrawal than the activity
itself. This theory could explain why some people hire someone to beat
them, or burn themselves with cigarettes. or why they are only attracted to
people who hurt them. Fear and aversion, in some perverse way , can be
transformed into pleasure.
Solomon hypothesized that endorphins—the morphinelike chemicals
that the brain secretes in response to stress—play a role in the paradoxical
addictions he described. I thought of his theory again when my library habit
led me to a paper titled “Pain in Men W ounded in Battle,” published in
1946. Having observed that 75 percent of severely wounded soldiers on the
Italian front did not request morphine, a sur geon by the name of Henry K.
Beecher speculated that “strong emotions can block pain.”16
W ere Beecher ’ s observations relevant to people with PTSD? Mark
Greenber g, Roger Pitman, Scott Orr , and I decided to ask eight V ietnam
combat veterans if they would be willing to take a standard pain test while
they watched scenes from a number of movies. The first clip we showed
was from Oliver Stone’ s graphically violent Platoon  (1986) , and while it
ran we measured how long the veterans could keep their right hands in a
bucket of ice water . W e then repeated this process with a peaceful (and
long-for gotten) movie clip. Seven of the eight veterans kept their hands in
the painfully cold water 30 percent longer during Platoon . W e then
calculated that the amount of analgesia produced by watching fifteen
minutes of a combat movie was equivalent to that produced by being
injected with eight milligrams of morphine, about the same dose a person
would receive in an emer gency room for crushing chest pain.
W e concluded that Beecher ’ s speculation that “strong emotions can
block pain” was the result of the release of morphinelike substances
manufactured in the brain. This suggested that for many traumatized
people, reexposure to stress might provide a similar relief from anxiety .17 It
was an interesting experiment, but it did not fully explain why Julia kept
going back to her violent pimp.SOOTHING THE BRAIN
The 1985 ACNP meeting was, if possible, even more thought provoking
than the previous year ’ s session. Kings College professor Jef frey Gray gave
a talk about the amygdala, a cluster of brain cells that determines whether a
sound, image, or body sensation is perceived as a threat. Gray’ s data
showed that the sensitivity of the amygdala depended, at least in part, on the
amount of the neurotransmitter serotonin in that part of the brain. Animals
with low serotonin levels were hyperreactive to stressful stimuli (like loud
sounds), while higher levels of serotonin dampened their fear system,
making them less likely to become aggressive or frozen in response to
potential threats.18
That struck me as an important finding: My patients were always
blowing up in response to small provocations and felt devastated by the
slightest rejection. I became fascinated by the possible role of serotonin in
PTSD. Other researchers had shown that dominant male monkeys had much
higher levels of brain serotonin than lower -ranking animals but that their
serotonin levels dropped when they were prevented from maintaining eye
contact with the monkeys they had once lorded over . In contrast, low-
ranking monkeys who were given serotonin supplements emer ged from the
pack to assume leadership.19 The social environment interacts with brain
chemistry . Manipulating a monkey into a lower position in the dominance
hierarchy made his serotonin drop, while chemically enhancing serotonin
elevated the rank of former subordinates.
The implications for traumatized people were obvious. Like Gray’ s
low-serotonin animals, they were hyperreactive, and their ability to cope
socially was often compromised. If we could find ways to increase brain
serotonin levels, perhaps we could address both problems simultaneously .
At that same 1985 meeting I learned that drug companies were developing
two new products to do precisely that, but since neither was yet available, I
experimented briefly with the health-food-store supplement L-tryptophan,
which is a chemical precursor of serotonin in the body . (The results were
disappointing.)  One of the drugs under investigation never made it to the
market. The other was fluoxetine, which, under the brand name Prozac,
became one of the most successful psychoactive drugs ever created.On Monday , February 8, 1988, Prozac was released by the drug
company Eli Lilly . The first patient I saw that day was a young woman with
a horrendous history of childhood abuse who was now struggling with
bulimia—she basically spent much of her life bingeing and pur ging. I gave
her a prescription for this brand-new drug, and when she returned on
Thursday she said, “I’ve had a very dif ferent last few days: I ate when I was
hungry , and the rest of the time I did my schoolwork.” This was one of the
most dramatic statements I had ever heard in my of fice.
On Friday I saw another patient to whom I’d given Prozac the previous
Monday . She was a chronically depressed mother of two school-aged
children, preoccupied with her failures as a mother and wife and
overwhelmed by demands from the parents who had badly mistreated her as
a child. After four days on Prozac she asked me if she could skip her
appointment the following Monday , which was Presidents’ Day . “After all,”
she explained, “I’ve never taken my kids skiing—my husband always does
—and they are of f that day . It would really be nice for them to have some
good memories of us having fun together .”
This was a patient who had always struggled merely to get through the
day . After her appointment I called someone I knew at Eli Lilly and said,
“Y ou have a drug that helps people to be in the present, instead of being
locked in the past.” Lilly later gave me a small grant to study the ef fects of
Prozac on PTSD in sixty-four people—twenty-two women and forty-two
men—the first study of the ef fects of this new class of drugs on PTSD. Our
T rauma Clinic team enrolled thirty-three nonveterans and my collaborators,
former colleagues at the V A, enrolled thirty-one combat veterans. For eight
weeks half of each group received Prozac and the other half a placebo. The
study was blinded: Neither we nor the patients knew which substance they
were taking, so that our preconceptions could not skew our assessments.
Everyone in the study—even those who had received the placebo—
improved, at least to some degree. Most treatment studies of PTSD find a
significant placebo ef fect. People who screw up their courage to participate
in a study for which they aren’ t paid, in which they’re repeatedly poked
with needles, and in which they have only a fifty-fifty chance of getting an
active drug are intrinsically motivated to solve their problem. Maybe their
reward is only the attention paid to them, the opportunity to respond toquestions about how they feel and think. But maybe the mother ’ s kisses that
soothe her child’ s scrapes are “just” a placebo as well.
Prozac worked significantly better than the placebo for the patients
from the T rauma Clinic. They slept more soundly; they had more control
over their emotions and were less preoccupied with the past than those who
received a sugar pill.20 Surprisingly , however , the Prozac had no ef fect at all
on the combat veterans at the V A—their PTSD symptoms were unchanged.
These results have held true for most subsequent pharmacological studies
on veterans: While a few have shown modest improvements, most have not
benefited at all. I have never been able to explain this, and I cannot accept
the most common explanation: that receiving a pension or disability
benefits prevents people from getting better . After all, the amygdala knows
nothing of pensions—it just detects threats.
Nonetheless, medications such as Prozac and related drugs like Zoloft,
Celexa, Cymbalta, and Paxil, have made a substantial contribution to the
treatment of trauma-related disorders. In our Prozac study we used the
Rorschach test to measure how traumatized people perceive their
surroundings. These data gave us an important clue to how this class of
drugs (formally known as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs)
might work. Before taking Prozac these patients’ emotions controlled their
reactions. I think of a Dutch patient, for example (not in the Prozac study)
who came to see me for treatment for a childhood rape and who was
convinced that I would rape her as soon as she heard my Dutch accent.
Prozac made a radical dif ference: It gave PTSD patients a sense of
perspective21 and helped them to gain considerable control over their
impulses. Jef frey Gray must have been right: When their serotonin levels
rose, many of my patients became less reactive.
THE TRIUMPH OF PHARMACOLOGY
It did not take long for pharmacology to revolutionize psychiatry . Drugs
gave doctors a greater sense of ef ficacy and provided a tool beyond talk
therapy . Drugs also produced income and profits. Grants from the
pharmaceutical industry provided us with laboratories filled with ener getic
graduate students and sophisticated instruments. Psychiatry departments,which had always been located in the basements of hospitals, started to
move up, both in terms of location and prestige.
One symbol of this change occurred at MMHC, where in the early
1990s the hospital’ s swimming pool was paved over to make space for a
laboratory , and the indoor basketball court was carved up into cubicles for
the new medication clinic. For decades doctors and patients had
democratically shared the pleasures of splashing in the pool and passing
balls down the court. I’d spent hours in the gym with patients back when I
was a ward attendant. It was the one place where we all could restore a
sense of physical well-being, an island in the midst of the misery we faced
every day . Now it had become a place for patients to “get fixed.”
The drug revolution that started out with so much promise may in the
end have done as much harm as good. The theory that mental illness is
caused primarily by chemical imbalances in the brain that can be corrected
by specific drugs has become broadly accepted, by the media and the public
as well as by the medical profession.22 In many places drugs have displaced
therapy and enabled patients to suppress their problems without addressing
the underlying issues. Antidepressants can make all the dif ference in the
world in helping with day-to-day functioning, and if it comes to a choice
between taking a sleeping pill and drinking yourself into a stupor every
night to get a few hours of sleep, there is no question which is preferable.
For people who are exhausted from trying to make it on their own through
yoga classes, workout routines, or simply toughing it out, medications often
can bring life-saving relief. The SSRIs can be very helpful in making
traumatized people less enslaved by their emotions, but they should only be
considered adjuncts in their overall treatment.23
After conducting numerous studies of medications for PTSD, I have
come to realize that psychiatric medications have a serious downside, as
they may deflect attention from dealing with the underlying issues. The
brain-disease model takes control over people’ s fate out of their own hands
and puts doctors and insurance companies in char ge of fixing their
problems.
Over the past three decades psychiatric medications have become a
mainstay in our culture, with dubious consequences. Consider the case of
antidepressants. If they were indeed as ef fective as we have been led tobelieve, depression should by now have become a minor issue in our
society . Instead, even as antidepressant use continues to increase, it has not
made a dent in hospital admissions for depression. The number of people
treated for depression has tripled over the past two decades, and one in ten
Americans now take antidepressants.24
The new generation of antipsychotics, such as Abilify , Risperdal,
Zyprexa, and Seroquel, are the top-selling drugs in the United States. In
2012 the public spent $1,526,228,000 on Abilify , more than on any other
medication. Number three was Cymbalta, an antidepressant that sold well
over a billion dollars’ worth of pills,25 even though it has never been shown
to be superior to older antidepressants like Prozac, for which much cheaper
generics are available. Medicaid, the government health program for the
poor , spends more on antipsychotics than on any other class of drugs.26 In
2008, the most recent year for which complete data are available, it funded
$3.6 billion for antipsychotic medications, up from $1.65 billion in 1999.
The number of people under the age of twenty receiving Medicaid-funded
prescriptions for antipsychotic drugs tripled between 1999 and 2008. On
November 4, 2013, Johnson & Johnson agreed to pay more than $2.2
billion in criminal and civil fines to settle accusations that it had improperly
promoted the antipsychotic drug Risperdal to older adults, children, and
people with developmental disabilities.27 But nobody is holding the doctors
who prescribed them accountable.
Half a million children in the United States currently take antipsychotic
drugs. Children from low-income families are four times as likely as
privately insured children to receive antipsychotic medicines. These
medications often are used to make abused and neglected children more
tractable. In 2008 19,045 children age five and under were prescribed
antipsychotics through Medicaid.28 One study , based on Medicaid data in
thirteen states, found that 12.4 percent of children in foster care received
antipsychotics, compared with 1.4 percent of Medicaid-eligible children in
general.29 These medications make children more manageable and less
aggressive, but they also interfere with motivation, play , and curiosity ,
which are indispensable for maturing into a well-functioning and
contributing member of society . Children who take them are also at risk of
becoming morbidly obese and developing diabetes. Meanwhile, drugoverdoses involving a combination of psychiatric and pain medications
continue to rise.30
Because drugs have become so profitable, major medical journals
rarely publish studies on nondrug treatments of mental health problems.31
Practitioners who explore treatments are typically mar ginalized as
“alternative.” Studies of nondrug treatments are rarely funded unless they
involve so-called manualized protocols, where patients and therapists go
through narrowly prescribed sequences that allow little fine-tuning to
individual patients’ needs. Mainstream medicine is firmly committed to a
better life through chemistry , and the fact that we can actually change our
own physiology and inner equilibrium by means other than drugs is rarely
considered.
ADAPT A TION OR DISEASE?
The brain-disease model overlooks four fundamental truths: (1) our
capacity to destroy one another is matched by our capacity to heal one
another . Restoring relationships and community is central to restoring well-
being; (2) language gives us the power to change ourselves and others by
communicating our experiences, helping us to define what we know , and
finding a common sense of meaning; (3) we have the ability to regulate our
own physiology , including some of the so-called involuntary functions of
the body and brain, through such basic activities as breathing, moving, and
touching; and (4) we can change social conditions to create environments in
which children and adults can feel safe and where they can thrive.
When we ignore these quintessential dimensions of humanity , we
deprive people of ways to heal from trauma and restore their autonomy .
Being a patient, rather than a participant in one’ s healing process, separates
suf fering people from their community and alienates them from an inner
sense of self. Given the limitations of drugs, I started to wonder if we could
find more natural ways to help people deal with their post-traumatic
responses.IC H A P T E R  3
L O O K I N G  I N T O  T H E  B R A I N :  T H E
N E U R O S C I E N C E  R E V O L U T I O N
If we could look through the skull into the brain of a consciously
thinking person, and if the place of optimal excitability were
luminous, then we should see playing over the cerebral surface, a
bright spot, with fantastic, waving borders constantly fluctuating in
size and form, and surrounded by darkness, more or less deep,
covering the rest of the hemisphere.
—Ivan Pavlov
Y ou observe a lot by watching.
—Y ogi Berra
n the early 1990s novel brain-imaging techniques opened up undreamed-
of capacities to gain a sophisticated understanding about the way the
brain processes information. Gigantic multimillion-dollar machines based
on advanced physics and computer technology rapidly made neuroscience
into one of the most popular areas for research. Positron emission
tomography (PET) and, later , functional magnetic resonance imaging
(fMRI) enabled scientists to visualize how dif ferent parts of the brain are
activated when people are engaged in certain tasks or when they remember
events from the past. For the first time we could watch the brain as itprocessed memories, sensations, and emotions and begin to map the circuits
of mind and consciousness. The earlier technology of measuring brain
chemicals like serotonin or norepinephrine had enabled scientists to look at
what fueled  neural activity , which is a bit like trying to understand a car ’ s
engine by studying gasoline. Neuroimaging made it possible to see inside
the engine. By doing so it has also transformed our understanding of
trauma.
Harvard Medical School was and is at the forefront of the neuroscience
revolution, and in 1994 a young psychiatrist, Scott Rauch, was appointed as
the first director of the Massachusetts General Hospital Neuroimaging
Laboratory . After considering the most relevant questions that this new
technology could answer and reading some articles I had written, Scott
asked me whether I thought we could study what happens in the brains of
people who have flashbacks.
I had just finished a study on how trauma is remembered  (to be
discussed in chapter 12), in which participants repeatedly told me how
upsetting it was to be suddenly hijacked by images, feelings, and sounds
from the past. When several said they wished they knew what trick their
brains were playing on them during these flashbacks, I asked eight of them
if they would be willing to return to the clinic and lie still inside a scanner
(an entirely new experience that I described in detail) while we re-created a
scene from the painful events that haunted them. T o my surprise, all eight
agreed, many of them expressing their hope that what we learned from their
suf fering could help other people.
My research assistant, Rita Fisler , who was working with us prior to
entering Harvard Medical School, sat down with every participant and
carefully constructed a script that re-created their trauma moment to
moment. W e deliberately tried to collect just isolated fragments of their
experience—particular images, sounds, and feelings—rather than the entire
story , because that is how trauma is experienced. Rita also asked the
participants to describe a scene where they felt safe and in control. One
person described her morning routine; another , sitting on the porch of a
farmhouse in V ermont overlooking the hills. W e would use this script for a
second scan, to provide a baseline measurement.
After the participants checked the scripts for accuracy (reading silently ,
which is less overwhelming than hearing or speaking), Rita made a voicerecording that would be played back to them while they were in the scanner .
A typical script:
Y ou are six years old and getting ready for bed. Y ou hear your
mother and father yelling at each other . Y ou are frightened and
your stomach is in a knot. Y ou and your younger brother and sister
are huddled at the top of the stairs. Y ou look over the banister and
see your father holding your mother ’ s arms while she struggles to
free herself. Y our mother is crying, spitting and hissing like an
animal. Y our face is flushed and you feel hot all over . When your
mother frees herself, she runs to the dining room and breaks a very
expensive Chinese vase. Y ou yell at your parents to stop, but they
ignore you. Y our mom runs upstairs and you hear her breaking the
TV . Y our little brother and sister try to get her to hide in the closet.
Y our heart pounds and you are trembling.
At this first session we explained the purpose of the radioactive oxygen
the participants would be breathing: As any part of the brain became more
or less metabolically active, its rate of oxygen consumption would
immediately change, which would be picked up by the scanner . W e would
monitor their blood pressure and heart rate throughout the procedure, so
that these physiological signs could be compared with brain activity .
Several days later the participants came to the imaging lab. Marsha, a
forty-year -old schoolteacher from a suburb outside of Boston, was the first
volunteer to be scanned. Her script took her back to the day , thirteen years
earlier , when she picked up her five-year -old daughter , Melissa, from day
camp. As they drove of f, Marsha heard a persistent beeping, indicating that
Melissa’ s seatbelt was not properly fastened. When Marsha reached over to
adjust the belt, she ran a red light. Another car smashed into hers from the
right, instantly killing her daughter . In the ambulance on the way to the
emer gency room, the seven-month-old fetus Marsha was carrying also died.
Overnight Marsha had changed from a cheerful woman who was the
life of the party into a haunted and depressed person filled with self-blame.
She moved from classroom teaching into school administration, because
working directly with children had become intolerable—as for manyparents who have lost children, their happy laughter had become a powerful
trigger .  Even hiding behind her paperwork she could barely make it through
the day . In a futile attempt to keep her feelings at bay , she coped by working
day and night.
I was standing outside the scanner as Marsha underwent the procedure
and could follow her physiological reactions on a monitor . The moment we
turned on the tape recorder , her heart started to race, and her blood pressure
jumped. Simply hearing the script similar activated the same physiological
responses that had occurred during the accident thirteen years earlier . After
the recorded script concluded and Marsha’ s heart rate and blood pressure
returned to normal,  we played her second script: getting out of bed and
brushing her teeth. This time her heart rate and blood pressure did not
change.
As she emer ged from the scanner , Marsha looked defeated, drawn out,
and frozen. Her breathing was shallow , her eyes were opened wide, and her
shoulders were hunched—the very image of vulnerability and
defenselessness. W e tried to comfort her , but I wondered if whatever we
discovered would be worth the price of her distress.
Picturing the brain on trauma.  Bright spots in (A) the limbic brain, and (B) the visual cortex,
show heightened activation. In drawing (C) the brain’ s speech center shows markedly
decreased activation.
After all eight participants completed the procedure, Scott Rauch went
to work with his mathematicians and statisticians to create compositeimages that compared the arousal created by a flashback with the brain in
neutral. After a few weeks he sent me the results, which you see above. I
taped the scans up on the refrigerator in my kitchen, and for the next few
months I stared at them every evening. It occurred to me that this was how
early astronomers must have felt when they peered through a telescope at a
new constellation.
There were some puzzling dots and colors on the scan, but the biggest
area of brain activation—a lar ge red spot in the right lower center of the
brain, which is the limbic area, or emotional brain—came as no surprise. It
was already well known that intense emotions activate the limbic system, in
particular an area within it called the amygdala. W e depend on the
amygdala to warn us of impending danger and to activate the body’ s stress
response. Our study clearly showed that when traumatized people are
presented with images, sounds, or thoughts related to their particular
experience, the amygdala reacts with alarm—even, as in Marsha’ s case,
thirteen years after the event. Activation of this fear center triggers the
cascade of stress hormones and nerve impulses that drive up blood pressure,
heart rate, and oxygen intake—preparing the body for fight or flight.1 The
monitors attached to Marsha’ s arms recorded this physiological state of
frantic arousal, even though she never totally lost track of the fact that she
was resting quietly in the scanner .
SPEECHLESS HORROR
Our most surprising finding was a white spot in the left frontal lobe of the
cortex, in a region called Broca’ s area. In this case the change in color
meant that there was a significant decrease in that part of the brain. Broca’ s
area is one of the speech centers of the brain, which is often af fected in
stroke patients when the blood supply to that region is cut of f. W ithout a
functioning Broca’ s area, you cannot put your thoughts and feelings into
words. Our scans showed that Broca’ s area went of fline whenever a
flashback was triggered. In other words, we had visual proof that the ef fects
of trauma are not necessarily dif ferent from—and can overlap with—the
ef fects of physical lesions like strokes.All trauma is preverbal. Shakespeare captures this state of speechless
terror in Macbeth , after the murdered king’ s body is discovered :  “Oh
horror! horror! horror! T ongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name thee!
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece!” Under extreme conditions
people may scream obscenities, call for their mothers, howl in terror , or
simply shut down. V ictims of assaults and accidents sit mute and frozen in
emer gency rooms; traumatized children “lose their tongues” and refuse to
speak. Photographs of combat soldiers show hollow-eyed men staring
mutely into a void.
Even years later traumatized people often have enormous dif ficulty
telling other people what has happened to them. Their bodies reexperience
terror , rage, and helplessness, as well as the impulse to fight or flee, but
these feelings are almost impossible to articulate. T rauma by nature drives
us to the edge of comprehension, cutting us of f from language based on
common experience or an imaginable past.
This doesn’ t mean that people can’ t talk about a tragedy that has
befallen them. Sooner or later most survivors, like the veterans in chapter 1,
come up with what many of them call their “cover story” that of fers some
explanation for their symptoms and behavior for public consumption. These
stories, however , rarely capture the inner truth of the experience. It is
enormously dif ficult to or ganize one’ s traumatic experiences into a coherent
account—a narrative with a beginning, a middle, and an end. Even a
seasoned reporter like the famed CBS correspondent Ed Murrow struggled
to convey the atrocities he saw when the Nazi concentration camp
Buchenwald was liberated in 1945: “I pray you believe what I have said. I
reported what I saw and heard, but only part of it. For most of it I have no
words.”
When words fail, haunting images capture the experience and return as
nightmares and flashbacks.  In contrast to the deactivation of Broca’ s area,
another region, Brodmann’ s area 19, lit up in our participants. This is a
region in the visual cortex that registers images when they first enter the
brain. W e were surprised to see brain activation in this area so long after the
original experience of the trauma. Under ordinary conditions raw images
registered in area 19 are rapidly dif fused to other brain areas that interpret
the meaning of what has been seen. Once again, we were witnessing a brain
region rekindled as if the trauma were actually occurring.As we will see in chapter 12, which discusses memory , other
unprocessed sense fragments of trauma, like sounds and smells and physical
sensations, are also registered separately from the story itself. Similar
sensations often trigger a flashback that brings them back into
consciousness, apparently unmodified by the passage of time.
SHIFTING T O ONE SIDE OF THE BRAIN
The scans also revealed that during flashbacks, our subjects’ brains lit up
only on the right side. T oday there’ s a huge body of scientific and popular
literature about the dif ference between the right and left brains. Back in the
early nineties I had heard that some people had begun to divide the world
between left-brainers (rational, logical people) and right-brainers (the
intuitive, artistic ones), but I hadn’ t paid much attention to this idea.
However , our scans clearly showed that images of past trauma activate the
right hemisphere of the brain and deactivate the left.
W e now know that the two halves of the brain do speak dif ferent
languages. The right is intuitive, emotional, visual, spatial, and tactual, and
the left is linguistic, sequential, and analytical. While the left half of the
brain does all the talking, the right half of the brain carries the music of
experience. It communicates through facial expressions and body language
and by making the sounds of love and sorrow: by singing, swearing, crying,
dancing, or mimicking. The right brain is the first to develop in the womb,
and it carries the nonverbal communication between mothers and infants.
W e know the left hemisphere has come online when children start to
understand language and learn how to speak. This enables them to name
things, compare them, understand their interrelations, and begin to
communicate their own unique, subjective experiences to others.
The left and right sides of the brain also process the imprints of the past
in dramatically dif ferent ways.2 The left brain remembers facts, statistics,
and the vocabulary of events. W e call on it to explain our experiences and
put them in order . The right brain stores memories of sound, touch, smell,
and the emotions they evoke. It reacts automatically to voices, facial
features, and gestures and places experienced in the past. What it recalls
feels like intuitive truth—the way things are. Even as we enumerate a lovedone’ s virtues to a friend, our feelings may be more deeply stirred by how
her face recalls the aunt we loved at age four .3
Under ordinary circumstances the two sides of the brain work together
more or less smoothly , even in people who might be said to favor one side
over the other . However , having one side or the other shut down, even
temporarily , or having one side cut of f entirely (as sometimes happened in
early brain sur gery) is disabling.
Deactivation of the left hemisphere has a direct impact on the capacity
to or ganize experience into logical sequences and to translate our shifting
feelings and perceptions into words. (Broca’ s area, which blacks out during
flashbacks, is on the left side.) W ithout sequencing we can’ t identify cause
and ef fect, grasp the long-term ef fects of our actions, or create coherent
plans for the future. People who are very upset sometimes say they are
“losing their minds.” In technical terms they are experiencing the loss of
executive functioning.
When something reminds traumatized people of the past, their right
brain reacts as if the traumatic event were happening in the present. But
because their left brain is not working very well, they may not be aware that
they are reexperiencing and reenacting the past—they are just furious,
terrified, enraged, ashamed, or frozen. After the emotional storm passes,
they may look for something or somebody to blame for it. They behaved
the way they did way because you  were ten minutes late, or because you
burned the potatoes, or because you  “never listen to me.” Of course, most of
us have done this from time to time, but when we cool down, we hopefully
can admit our mistake. T rauma interferes with this kind of awareness, and,
over time, our research demonstrated why .
STUCK IN FIGHT OR FLIGHT
What had happened to Marsha in the scanner gradually started to make
sense. Thirteen years after her tragedy we had activated the sensations—the
sounds and images from the accident—that were still stored in her memory .
When these sensations came to the surface, they activated her alarm system,
which caused her to react as if she were back in the hospital being told that
her daughter had died. The passage of thirteen years was erased. Hersharply increased heart rate and blood pressure readings reflected her
physiological state of frantic alarm.
Adrenaline is one of the hormones that are critical to help us fight back
or flee in the face of danger . Increased adrenaline was responsible for our
participants’ dramatic rise in heart rate and blood pressure while listening to
their trauma narrative. Under normal conditions people react to a threat
with a temporary increase in their stress hormones. As soon as the threat is
over , the hormones dissipate and the body returns to normal. The stress
hormones of traumatized people, in contrast, take much longer to return to
baseline and spike quickly and disproportionately in response to mildly
stressful stimuli. The insidious ef fects of constantly elevated stress
hormones include memory and attention problems, irritability , and sleep
disorders. They also contribute to many long-term health issues, depending
on which body system is most vulnerable in a particular individual.
W e now know that there is another possible response to threat, which
our scans aren’ t yet capable of measuring. Some people simply go into
denial: Their bodies register the threat, but their conscious minds go on as if
nothing has happened. However , even though the mind may learn to ignore
the messages from the emotional brain, the alarm signals don’ t stop. The
emotional brain keeps working, and stress hormones keep sending signals
to the muscles to tense for action or immobilize in collapse. The physical
ef fects on the or gans go on unabated until they demand notice when they
are expressed as illness. Medications, drugs, and alcohol can also
temporarily dull or obliterate unbearable sensations and feelings. But the
body continues to keep the score.
W e can interpret what happened to Marsha in the scanner from several
dif ferent perspectives, each of which has implications for treatment. W e can
focus on the neurochemical and physiological disruptions that were so
evident and make a case that she is suf fering from a biochemical imbalance
that is reactivated whenever she is reminded of her daughter ’ s death. W e
might then search for a drug or a combination of drugs that would damp
down the reaction or , in the best case, restore her chemical equilibrium.
Based on the results of our scans, some of my colleagues at MGH began
investigating drugs that might make people less responsive to the ef fects of
elevated adrenaline.W e can also make a strong case that Marsha is hypersensitized to her
memories of the past and that the best treatment would be some form of
desensitization.4 After repeatedly rehearsing the details of the trauma with a
therapist, her biological responses might become muted, so that she could
realize and remember that “that was then and this is now ,” rather than
reliving the experience over and over .
For a hundred years or more, every textbook of psychology and
psychotherapy has advised that some method of talking about distressing
feelings can resolve them. However , as we’ve seen, the experience of
trauma itself gets in the way of being able to do that. No matter how much
insight and understanding we develop, the rational brain is basically
impotent to talk the emotional brain out of its own reality . I am continually
impressed by how dif ficult it is for people who have gone through the
unspeakable to convey the essence of their experience. It is so much easier
for them to talk about what has been done to them—to tell a story of
victimization and revenge—than to notice, feel, and put into words the
reality of their internal experience.
Our scans had revealed how their dread persisted and could be
triggered by multiple aspects of daily experience. They had not integrated
their experience into the ongoing stream of their life. They continued to be
“there” and did not know how to be “here”—fully alive in the present.
Three years after being a participant in our study Marsha came to see
me as a patient. I successfully treated her with EMDR, the subject of
chapter 15.P AR T TWO
THIS IS YOUR BRAIN
ON TRAUMAOC H A P T E R  4
R U N N I N G  F O R  Y O U R  L I F E :  T H E
A N A T O M Y  O F  S U R V I V A L
Prior to the advent of brain, there was no color and no sound in the
universe, nor was there any flavor or aroma and probably little
sense and no feeling or emotion. Before brains the universe was
also free of pain and anxiety .
—Roger Sperry1
n September 1 1, 2001, five-year -old Noam Saul witnessed the first
passenger plane slam into the W orld T rade Center from the windows
of his first-grade classroom at PS 234, less than 1,500 feet away . He and his
classmates ran with their teacher down the stairs to the lobby , where most
of them were reunited with parents who had dropped them of f at school just
moments earlier . Noam, his older brother , and their dad were three of the
tens of thousands of people who ran for their lives through the rubble, ash,
and smoke of lower Manhattan that morning.
T en days later I visited his family , who are friends of mine, and that
evening his parents and I went for a walk in the eerie darkness through the
still-smoking pit where T ower One once stood, making our way among the
rescue crews who were working around the clock under the blazing klieg
lights. When we returned home, Noam was still awake, and he showed me a
picture that he had drawn at 9:00 a.m. on September 12. The drawing
depicted what he had seen the day before: an airplane slamming into thetower , a ball of fire, firefighters, and people jumping from the tower ’ s
windows. But at the bottom of the picture he had drawn something else: a
black circle at the foot of the buildings. I had no idea what it was, so I asked
him. “A trampoline,” he replied. What was a trampoline doing there? Noam
explained, “So that the next time when people have to jump they will be
safe.” I was stunned: This five-year -old boy , a witness to unspeakable
mayhem and disaster just twenty-four hours before he made that drawing,
had used his imagination to process what he had seen and begin to go on
with his life.
Noam was fortunate. His entire family was unharmed, he had grown up
surrounded by love, and he was able to grasp that the tragedy they had
witnessed had come to an end. During disasters young children usually take
their cues from their parents. As long as their caregivers remain calm and
responsive to their needs, they often survive terrible incidents without
serious psychological scars.
Five-year -old Noam’ s drawing made after he witnessed the W orld T rade Center attack on
9/1 1.  He reproduced the image that haunted so many survivors—people jumping to escape
from the inferno—but with a life-saving addition: a trampoline at the bottom of the collapsing
building.But Noam’ s experience allows us to see in outline two critical aspects
of the adaptive response to threat that is basic to human survival. At the
time the disaster occurred, he was able to take an active role by running
away from it, thus becoming an agent in his own rescue. And once he had
reached the safety of home, the alarm bells in his brain and body quieted.
This freed his mind to make some sense of what had happened and even to
imagine a creative alternative to what he had seen—a lifesaving trampoline.
In contrast to Noam, traumatized people become stuck, stopped in their
growth because they can’ t integrate new experiences into their lives. I was
very moved when the veterans of Patton’ s army gave me a W orld W ar II
army-issue watch for Christmas, but it was a sad memento of the year their
lives had ef fectively stopped: 1944. Being traumatized means continuing to
or ganize your life as if the trauma were still going on—unchanged and
immutable—as every new encounter or event is contaminated by the past.
T rauma af fects the entire human or ganism—body , mind, and brain. In PTSD the body
continues to defend against a threat that belongs to the past. Healing from PTSD means being
able to terminate this continued stress mobilization and restoring the entire or ganism to safety .
After trauma the world is experienced with a dif ferent nervous system.
The survivor ’ s ener gy now becomes focused on suppressing inner chaos, atthe expense of spontaneous involvement in their lives. These attempts to
maintain control over unbearable physiological reactions can result in a
whole range of physical symptoms, including fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue,
and other autoimmune diseases. This explains why it is critical for trauma
treatment to engage the entire or ganism, body , mind, and brain.
ORGANIZED T O SUR VIVE
This illustration on page 53 shows the whole-body response to threat.
When the brain’ s alarm system is turned on, it automatically triggers
preprogrammed physical escape plans in the oldest parts of the brain. As in
other animals, the nerves and chemicals that make up our basic brain
structure have a direct connection with our body . When the old brain takes
over , it partially shuts down the higher brain, our conscious mind, and
propels the body to run, hide, fight, or , on occasion, freeze. By the time we
are fully aware of our situation, our body may already be on the move. If
the fight/flight/freeze response is successful and we escape the danger , we
recover our internal equilibrium and gradually “regain our senses.”AP PHOT O/P AUL HA WTHORNEILLINOISPHOT O.COM
Effective action versus immobilization.  Ef fective action (the result of fight/flight) ends the
threat. Immobilization keeps the body in a state of inescapable shock and learned helplessness.
Faced with danger people automatically secrete stress hormones to fuel resistance and escape.
Brain and body are programmed to run for home, where safety can be restored and stress
hormones can come to rest. In these strapped-down men who are being evacuated far from
home after Hurricane Katrina stress hormone levels remain elevated and are turned against the
survivors, stimulating ongoing fear , depression, rage, and physical disease.
If for some reason the normal response is blocked — for example, when
people are held down, trapped, or otherwise prevented from taking ef fective
action, be it in a war zone, a car accident, domestic violence, or a rape—the
brain keeps secreting stress chemicals, and the brain’ s electrical circuits
continue to fire in vain.2 Long after the actual event has passed, the brain
may keep sending signals to the body to escape a threat that no longer
exists. Since at least 1889, when the French psychologist Pierre Janet
published the first scientific account of traumatic stress,3 it has been
recognized that trauma survivors are prone to “continue the action, or rather
the (futile) attempt at action, which began when the thing happened.” Being
able to move and do  something to protect oneself is a critical factor indetermining whether or not a horrible experience will leave long-lasting
scars.
In this chapter I’m going to go deeper into the brain’ s response to
trauma. The more neuroscience discovers about the brain, the more we
realize that it is a vast network of interconnected parts or ganized to help us
survive and flourish. Knowing how these parts work together is essential to
understanding how trauma af fects every part of the human or ganism and
can serve as an indispensable guide to resolving traumatic stress.
THE BRAIN FROM BOTT OM T O T OP
The most important job of the brain is to ensure our survival, even under the
most miserable conditions. Everything else is secondary . In order to do that,
brains need to: (1) generate internal signals that register what our bodies
need, such as food, rest, protection, sex, and shelter; (2) create a map of the
world to point us where to go to satisfy those needs; (3) generate the
necessary ener gy and actions to get us there; (4) warn us of dangers and
opportunities along the way; and (5) adjust our actions based on the
requirements of the moment.4 And since we human beings are mammals,
creatures that can only survive and thrive in groups, all of these imperatives
require coordination and collaboration. Psychological problems occur when
our internal signals don’ t work, when our maps don’ t lead us where we
need to go, when we are too paralyzed to move, when our actions do not
correspond to our needs, or when our relationships break down. Every brain
structure that I discuss has a role to play in these essential functions, and as
we will see, trauma can interfere with every one of them.
Our rational, cognitive brain is actually the youngest part of the brain
and occupies only about 30 percent of the area inside our skull. The rational
brain is primarily concerned with the world outside us: understanding how
things and people work and figuring out how to accomplish our goals,
manage our time, and sequence our actions. Beneath the rational brain lie
two evolutionarily older , and to some degree separate, brains, which are in
char ge of everything else: the moment-by-moment registration and
management of our body’ s physiology and the identification of comfort,safety , threat, hunger , fatigue, desire, longing, excitement, pleasure, and
pain.
The brain is built from the bottom up. It develops level by level within
every child in the womb, just as it did in the course of evolution. The most
primitive part, the part that is already online when we are born, is the
ancient animal brain, often called the reptilian brain. It is located in the
brain stem, just above the place where our spinal cord enters the skull. The
reptilian brain is responsible for all the things that newborn babies can do:
eat, sleep, wake, cry , breathe; feel temperature, hunger , wetness, and pain;
and rid the body of toxins by urinating and defecating. The brain stem and
the hypothalamus (which sits directly above it) together control the ener gy
levels of the body . They coordinate the functioning of the heart and lungs
and also the endocrine and immune systems, ensuring that these basic life-
sustaining systems are maintained within the relatively stable internal
balance known as homeostasis.
Breathing, eating, sleeping, pooping, and peeing are so fundamental
that their significance is easily neglected when we’re considering the
complexities of mind and behavior . However , if your sleep is disturbed or
your bowels don’ t work, or if you always feel hungry , or if being touched
makes you want to scream (as is often the case with traumatized children
and adults), the entire or ganism is thrown into disequilibrium. It is amazing
how many psychological problems involve dif ficulties with sleep, appetite,
touch, digestion, and arousal. Any ef fective treatment for trauma has to
address these basic housekeeping functions of the body .
Right above the reptilian brain is the limbic system. It’ s also known as
the mammalian brain, because all animals that live in groups and nurture
their young possess one. Development of this part of the brain truly takes
of f after a baby is born. It is the seat of the emotions, the monitor of danger ,
the judge of what is pleasurable or scary , the arbiter of what is or is not
important for survival purposes. It is also a central command post for
coping with the challenges of living within our complex social networks.
The limbic system is shaped in response to experience, in partnership
with the infant’ s own genetic makeup and inborn temperament. (As all
parents of more than one child quickly notice, babies dif fer from birth in the
intensity and nature of their reactions to similar events.) Whatever happens
to a baby contributes to the emotional and perceptual map of the world thatits developing brain creates. As my colleague Bruce Perry explains it, the
brain is formed in a “use-dependent manner .”5 This is another way of
describing neuroplasticity , the relatively recent discovery that neurons that
“fire together , wire together .” When a circuit fires repeatedly , it can become
a default setting—the response most likely to occur . If you feel safe and
loved, your brain becomes specialized in exploration, play , and cooperation;
if you are frightened and unwanted, it specializes in managing feelings of
fear and abandonment.
As infants and toddlers we learn about the world by moving, grabbing,
and crawling and by discovering what happens when we cry , smile, or
protest. W e are constantly experimenting with our surroundings—how do
our interactions change the way our bodies feel? Attend any two-year -old’ s
birthday party and notice how little Kimberly will engage you, play with
you, flirt with you, without any need for language. These early explorations
shape the limbic structures devoted to emotions and memory , but these
structures can also be significantly modified by later experiences: for the
better by a close friendship or a beautiful first love, for example, or for the
worse by a violent assault, relentless bullying, or neglect.
T aken together the reptilian brain and limbic system make up what I’ll
call the “emotional brain” throughout this book.6 The emotional brain is at
the heart of the central nervous system, and its key task is to look out for
your welfare. If it detects danger or a special opportunity—such as a
promising partner—it alerts you by releasing a squirt of hormones. The
resulting visceral sensations (ranging from mild queasiness to the grip of
panic in your chest) will interfere with whatever your mind is currently
focused on and get you moving—physically and mentally—in a dif ferent
direction. Even at their most subtle, these sensations have a huge influence
on the small and lar ge decisions we make throughout our lives: what we
choose to eat, where we like to sleep and with whom, what music we prefer ,
whether we like to garden or sing in a choir , and whom we befriend and
whom we detest.
The emotional brain’ s cellular or ganization and biochemistry are
simpler than those of the neocortex, our rational brain, and it assesses
incoming information in a more global way . As a result, it jumps to
conclusions based on rough similarities, in contrast with the rational brain,which is or ganized to sort through a complex set of options. (The textbook
example is leaping back in terror when you see a snake—only to realize that
it’ s just a coiled rope.) The emotional brain initiates preprogrammed escape
plans, like the fight-or -flight responses. These muscular and physiological
reactions are automatic, set in motion without any thought or planning on
our part, leaving our conscious, rational capacities to catch up later , often
well after the threat is over .
Finally we reach the top layer of the brain, the neocortex. W e share this
outer layer with other mammals, but it is much thicker in us humans. In the
second year of life the frontal lobes, which make up the bulk of our
neocortex, begin to develop at a rapid pace. The ancient philosophers called
seven years “the age of reason.” For us first grade is the prelude of things to
come, a life or ganized around frontal-lobe capacities: sitting still; keeping
sphincters in check; being able to use words rather than acting out;
understanding abstract and symbolic ideas; planning for tomorrow; and
being in tune with teachers and classmates.
The frontal lobes are responsible for the qualities that make us unique
within the animal kingdom.7 They enable us to use language and abstract
thought. They give us our ability to absorb and integrate vast amounts of
information and attach meaning to it. Despite our excitement about the
linguistic feats of chimpanzees and rhesus monkeys, only human beings
command the words and symbols necessary to create the communal,
spiritual, and historical contexts that shape our lives.
The frontal lobes allow us to plan and reflect, to imagine and play out
future scenarios. They help us to predict what will happen if we take one
action (like applying for a new job) or neglect another (not paying the rent).
They make choice possible and underlie our astonishing creativity .
Generations of frontal lobes, working in close collaboration, have created
culture, which got us from dug-out canoes, horse-drawn carriages, and
letters to jet planes, hybrid cars, and e-mail. They also gave us Noam’ s
lifesaving trampoline.
MIRRORING EACH OTHER: INTERPERSONAL
NEUROBIOLOGYCrucial for understanding trauma, the frontal lobes are also the seat of
empathy—our ability to “feel into” someone else. One of the truly
sensational discoveries of modern neuroscience took place in 1994, when in
a lucky accident a group of Italian scientists identified specialized cells in
the cortex that came to be known as mirror neurons.8 The researchers had
attached electrodes to individual neurons in a monkey’ s premotor area, then
set up a computer to monitor precisely which neurons fired when the
monkey picked up a peanut or grasped a banana. At one point an
experimenter was putting food pellets into a box when he looked up at the
computer . The monkey’ s brain cells were firing at the exact location where
the motor command neurons were located. But the monkey wasn’ t eating or
moving. He was watching the researcher , and his brain was vicariously
mirroring the researcher ’ s actions.
Numerous other experiments followed around the world, and it soon
became clear that mirror neurons explained many previously unexplainable
aspects of the mind, such as empathy , imitation, synchrony , and even the
development of language. One writer compared mirror neurons to “neural
W iFi”9—we pick up not only another person’ s movement but her emotional
state and intentions as well. When people are in sync with each other , they
tend to stand or sit similar ways, and their voices take on the same rhythms.
But our mirror neurons also make us vulnerable to others’ negativity , so that
we respond to their anger with fury or are dragged down by their
depression. I’ll have more to say about mirror neurons later in this book,
because trauma almost invariably involves not being seen, not being
mirrored, and not being taken into account. T reatment needs to reactivate
the capacity to safely mirror , and be mirrored, by others, but also to resist
being hijacked by others’ negative emotions.The T riune (Thr ee-part) Brain.  The brain develops from the bottom up. The reptilian brain
develops in the womb and or ganizes basic life sustaining functions. It is highly responsive to
threat throughout our entire life span. The limbic system is or ganized mainly during the first six
years of life but continues to evolve in a use-dependent manner . T rauma can have a major
impact of its functioning throughout life. The prefrontal cortex develops last, and also is
af fected by trauma exposure, including being unable to filter out irrelevant information.
Throughout life it is vulnerable to go of f-line in response to threat.
As anybody who has worked with brain-damaged people or taken care
of demented parents has learned the hard way , well-functioning frontal
lobes are crucial for harmonious relationships with our fellow humans.
Realizing that other people can think and feel dif ferently from us is a huge
developmental step for two- and three-year -olds. They learn to understand
others’ motives, so they can adapt and stay safe in groups that have
dif ferent perceptions, expectations, and values. W ithout flexible, active
frontal lobes people become creatures of habit, and their relationships
become superficial and routine. Invention and innovation, discovery and
wonder—all are lacking.
Our frontal lobes can also (sometimes, but not always) stop us from
doing things that will embarrass us or hurt others.  W e don’ t have to eat
every time we’re hungry , kiss anybody who rouses our desires, or blow up
every time we’re angry . But it is exactly on that edge between impulse and
acceptable behavior where most of our troubles begin. The more intense thevisceral, sensory input from the emotional brain, the less capacity the
rational brain has to put a damper on it.
IDENTIFYING DANGER: THE COOK AND THE SMOKE
DETECT OR
Danger is a normal part of life, and the brain is in char ge of detecting it and
or ganizing our response. Sensory information about the outside world
arrives through our eyes, nose, ears, and skin. These sensations conver ge in
the thalamus, an area inside the limbic system that acts as the “cook” within
the brain. The thalamus stirs all the input from our perceptions into a fully
blended autobiographical soup, an integrated, coherent experience of “this
is what is happening to me.”10 The sensations are then passed on in two
directions—down to the amygdala, two small almond-shaped structures that
lie deeper in the limbic, unconscious brain, and up to the frontal lobes,
where they reach our conscious awareness. The neuroscientist Joseph
LeDoux calls the pathway to the amygdala “the low road,” which is
extremely fast, and that to the frontal cortex the “high road,” which takes
several milliseconds longer in the midst of an overwhelmingly threatening
experience. However , processing by the thalamus can break down. Sights,
sounds, smells, and touch are encoded as isolated, dissociated fragments,
and normal memory processing disintegrates. T ime freezes, so that the
present danger feels like it will last forever .
The central function of the amygdala, which I call the brain’ s smoke
detector , is to identify whether incoming input is relevant for our survival.1 1
It does so quickly and automatically , with the help of feedback from the
hippocampus, a nearby structure that relates the new input to past
experiences. If the amygdala senses a threat—a potential collision with an
oncoming vehicle, a person on the street who looks threatening—it sends an
instant message down to the hypothalamus and the brain stem, recruiting
the stress-hormone system and the autonomic nervous system (ANS) to
orchestrate a whole-body response. Because the amygdala processes the
information it receives from the thalamus faster than the frontal lobes do, it
decides whether incoming information is a threat to our survival evenbefore we are consciously aware of the danger . By the time we realize what
is happening, our body may already be on the move.
The emotional brain has first dibs on interpr eting incoming information.  Sensory
Information about the environment and body state received by the eyes, ears, touch, kinesthetic
sense, etc., conver ges on the thalamus, where it is processed, and then passed on to the
amygdala to interpret its emotional significance. This occurs with lightning speed. If a threat is
detected the amygdala sends messages to the hypothalamus to secrete stress hormones to
defend against that threat. The neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux calls this the low road. The
second neural pathway , the high road, runs from the thalamus, via the hippocampus and
anterior cingulate, to the prefrontal cortex, the rational brain, for a conscious and much more
refined interpretation. This takes several microseconds longer . If the interpretation of threat by
the amygdala is too intense, and/or the filtering system from the higher areas of the brain are
too weak, as often happens in PTSD, people lose control over automatic emer gency responses,
like prolonged startle or aggressive outbursts.
The amygdala’ s danger signals trigger the release of powerful stress
hormones, including cortisol and adrenaline, which increase heart rate,
blood pressure, and rate of breathing, preparing us to fight back or run
away . Once the danger is past, the body returns to its normal state fairly
quickly . But when recovery is blocked, the body is triggered to defend
itself, which makes people feel agitated and aroused.
While the smoke detector is usually pretty good at picking up danger
clues, trauma increases the risk of misinterpreting whether a particularsituation is dangerous or safe. Y ou can get along with other people only if
you can accurately gauge whether their intentions are benign or dangerous.
Even a slight misreading can lead to painful misunderstandings in
relationships at home and at work. Functioning ef fectively in a complex
work environment or a household filled with rambunctious kids requires the
ability to quickly assess how people are feeling and continuously adjusting
your behavior accordingly . Faulty alarm systems lead to blowups or
shutdowns in response to innocuous comments or facial expressions.
CONTROLLING THE STRESS RESPONSE: THE
W A TCHT OWER
If the amygdala is the smoke detector in the brain, think of the frontal lobes
—and specifically the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC),12 located directly
above our eyes—as the watchtower , of fering a view of the scene from on
high. Is that smoke you smell the sign that your house is on fire and you
need to get out, fast—or is it coming from the steak you put over too high a
flame? The amygdala doesn’ t make such judgments; it just gets you ready
to fight back or escape, even before the frontal lobes get a chance to weigh
in with their assessment. As long as you are not too upset, your frontal
lobes can restore your balance by helping you realize that you are
responding to a false alarm and abort the stress response.
Ordinarily the executive capacities of the prefrontal cortex enable
people to observe what is going on, predict what will happen if they take a
certain action, and make a conscious choice. Being able to hover calmly
and objectively over our thoughts, feelings, and emotions (an ability I’ll call
mindfulness throughout this book) and then take our time to respond allows
the executive brain to inhibit, or ganize, and modulate the hardwired
automatic reactions preprogrammed into the emotional brain. This capacity
is crucial for preserving our relationships with our fellow human beings. As
long as our frontal lobes are working properly , we’re unlikely to lose our
temper every time a waiter is late with our order or an insurance company
agent puts us on hold. (Our watchtower also tells us that other people’ s
anger and threats are a function of their  emotional state.) When that systembreaks down, we become like conditioned animals: The moment we detect
danger we automatically go into fight-or -flight mode.
T op down or bottom up.  Structures in the emotional brain decide what we perceive as
dangerous or safe. There are two ways of changing the threat detection system: from the top
down, via modulating messages from the medial prefrontal cortex (not just prefrontal cortex),
or from the bottom up, via the reptilian brain, through breathing, movement, and touch.
In PTSD the critical balance between the amygdala (smoke detector)
and the MPFC (watchtower) shifts radically , which makes it much harder to
control emotions and impulses. Neuroimaging studies of human beings in
highly emotional states reveal that intense fear , sadness, and anger all
increase the activation of subcortical brain regions involved in emotions
and significantly reduce the activity in various areas in the frontal lobe,
particularly the MPFC. When that occurs, the inhibitory capacities of the
frontal lobe break down, and people “take leave of their senses”: They may
startle in response to any loud sound, become enraged by small frustrations,
or freeze when somebody touches them.13Ef fectively dealing with stress depends upon achieving a balance
between the smoke detector and the watchtower . If you want to manage
your emotions better , your brain gives you two options: Y ou can learn to
regulate them from the top down or from the bottom up.
Knowing the dif ference between top down and bottom up regulation is
central for understanding and treating traumatic stress. T op-down regulation
involves strengthening the capacity of the watchtower to monitor your
body’ s sensations. Mindfulness meditation and yoga can help with this.
Bottom-up regulation involves recalibrating the autonomic nervous system,
(which, as we have seen, originates in the brain stem). W e can access the
ANS through breath, movement, or touch. Breathing is one of the few body
functions under both conscious and autonomic control. In part 5 of this
book we’ll explore specific techniques for increasing both top-down and
bottom-up regulation.
THE RIDER AND THE HORSE
For now I want to emphasize that emotion is not opposed to reason; our
emotions assign value to experiences and thus are the foundation of reason.
Our self-experience is the product of the balance between our rational and
our emotional brains. When these two systems are in balance, we “feel like
ourselves.” However , when our survival is at stake, these systems can
function relatively independently .
If, say , you are driving along, chatting with a friend, and a truck
suddenly looms in the corner of your eye, you instantly stop talking, slam
on the brakes, and turn your steering wheel to get out of harm’ s way . If your
instinctive actions have saved you from a collision, you may resume where
you left of f. Whether you are able to do so depends lar gely on how quickly
your visceral reactions subside to the threat.
The neuroscientist Paul MacLean, who developed the three-part
description of the brain that I’ve used here, compared the relationship
between the rational brain and the emotional brain to that between a more
or less competent rider and his unruly horse.14 As long as the weather is
calm and the path is smooth, the rider can feel in excellent control. But
unexpected sounds or threats from other animals can make the horse bolt,forcing the rider to hold on for dear life. Likewise, when people feel that
their survival is at stake or they are seized by rages, longings, fear , or sexual
desires, they stop listening to the voice of reason, and it makes little sense
to ar gue with them. Whenever the limbic system decides that something is a
question of life or death, the pathways between the frontal lobes and the
limbic system become extremely tenuous.
Psychologists usually try to help people use insight and understanding
to manage their behavior . However , neuroscience research shows that very
few psychological problems are the result of defects in understanding; most
originate in pressures from deeper regions in the brain that drive our
perception and attention. When the alarm bell of the emotional brain keeps
signaling that you are in danger , no amount of insight will silence it. I am
reminded of the comedy in which a seven-time recidivist in an anger -
management program extols the virtue of the techniques he’ s learned:
“They are great and work terrific—as long as you are not really angry .”
When our emotional and rational brains are in conflict (as when we’re
enraged with someone we love, frightened by someone we depend on, or
lust after someone who is of f limits), a tug-of-war ensues. This war is
lar gely played out in the theater of visceral experience—your gut, your
heart, your lungs—and will lead to both physical discomfort and
psychological misery . Chapter 6 will discuss how the brain and viscera
interact in safety and danger , which is key to understanding the many
physical manifestations of trauma.
I’d like to end this chapter by examining two more brain scans that
illustrate some of the core features of traumatic stress: timeless reliving;
reexperiencing images, sounds, and emotions; and dissociation.
ST AN AND UTE’S BRAINS ON TRAUMA
On a fine September morning in 1999, Stan and Ute Lawrence, a
professional couple in their forties, set out from their home in London,
Ontario, to attend a business meeting in Detroit. Halfway through the
journey they ran into a wall of dense fog that reduced visibility to zero in a
split second. Stan immediately slammed on the brakes, coming to a
standstill sideways on the highway , just missing a huge truck. An eighteen-wheeler went flying over the trunk of their car; vans and cars slammed into
them and into each other . People who got out of their cars were hit as they
ran for their lives. The ear -splitting crashes went on and on—with each jolt
from behind they felt this would be the one that killed them. Stan and Ute
were trapped in car number thirteen of an eighty-seven-car pileup, the worst
road disaster in Canadian history .15
Then came the eerie silence. Stan struggled to open the doors and
windows, but the eighteen-wheeler that had crushed their trunk was wedged
against the car . Suddenly , someone was pounding on their roof. A girl was
screaming, “Get me out of here—I’m on fire!” Helplessly , they saw her die
as the car she’d been in was consumed by flames. The next thing they
knew , a truck driver was standing on the hood of their car with a fire
extinguisher . He smashed the windshield to free them, and Stan climbed
through the opening. T urning around to help his wife, he saw Ute sitting
frozen in her seat. Stan and the truck driver lifted her out and an ambulance
took them to an emer gency room. Aside from a few cuts, they were found
to be physically unscathed.
At home that night, neither Stan nor Ute wanted to go to sleep. They
felt that if they let go, they would die. They were irritable, jumpy , and on
edge. That night, and for many to come, they drank copious quantities of
wine to numb their fear . They could not stop the images that were haunting
them or the questions that went on and on: What if they’d left earlier? What
if they hadn’ t stopped for gas? After three months of this, they sought help
from Dr . Ruth Lanius, a psychiatrist at the University of W estern Ontario.
Dr . Lanius, who had been my student at the T rauma Center a few years
earlier , told Stan and Ute she wanted to visualize their brains with an fMRI
scan before beginning treatment. The fMRI measures neural activity by
tracking changes in blood flow in the brain, and unlike the PET scan, it
does not require exposure to radiation. Dr . Lanius used the same kind of
script-driven imagery we had used at Harvard, capturing the images,
sounds, smells, and other sensations Stan and Ute had experienced while
they were trapped in the car .
Stan went first and immediately went into a flashback, just as Marsha
had in our Harvard study . He came out of the scanner sweating, with his
heart racing and his blood pressure sky high. “This was just the way I feltduring the accident,” he reported. “I was sure I was going to die, and there
was nothing I could do to save myself.” Instead of remembering the
accident as something that had happened three months earlier , Stan was
reliving it.
DISSOCIA TION AND RELIVING
Dissociation is the essence of trauma. The overwhelming experience is split
of f and fragmented, so that the emotions, sounds, images, thoughts, and
physical sensations related to the trauma take on a life of their own. The
sensory fragments of memory intrude into the present, where they are
literally relived. As long as the trauma is not resolved, the stress hormones
that the body secretes to protect itself keep circulating, and the defensive
movements and emotional responses keep getting replayed. Unlike Stan,
however , many people may not be aware of the connection between their
“crazy” feelings and reactions and the traumatic events that are being
replayed. They have no idea why they respond to some minor irritation as if
they were about to be annihilated.
Flashbacks and reliving are in some ways worse that the trauma itself.
A traumatic event has a beginning and an end—at some point it is over . But
for people with PTSD a flashback can occur at any time, whether they are
awake or asleep. There is no way of knowing when it’ s going to occur again
or how long it will last. People who suf fer from flashbacks often or ganize
their lives around trying to protect against them. They may compulsively go
to the gym to pump iron (but finding that they are never strong enough),
numb themselves with drugs, or try to cultivate an illusory sense of control
in highly dangerous situations (like motorcycle racing, bungee jumping, or
working as an ambulance driver). Constantly fighting unseen dangers is
exhausting and leaves them fatigued, depressed, and weary .
If elements of the trauma are replayed again and again, the
accompanying stress hormones engrave those memories ever more deeply
in the mind. Ordinary , day-to-day events become less and less compelling.
Not being able to deeply take in what is going on around them makes it
impossible to feel fully alive. It becomes harder to feel the joys and
aggravations of ordinary life, harder to concentrate on the tasks at hand. Notbeing fully alive in the present keeps them more firmly imprisoned in the
past.
T riggered responses manifest in various ways. V eterans may react to
the slightest cue—like hitting a bump in the road or a seeing a kid playing
in the street—as if they were in a war zone. They startle easily and become
enraged or numb. V ictims of childhood sexual abuse may anesthetize their
sexuality and then feel intensely ashamed if they become excited by
sensations or images that recall their molestation, even when those
sensations are the natural pleasures associated with particular body parts. If
trauma survivors are forced to discuss their experiences, one person’ s blood
pressure may increase while another responds with the beginnings of a
migraine headache. Still others may shut down emotionally and not feel any
obvious changes. However , in the lab we have no problem detecting their
racing hearts and the stress hormones churning through their bodies.
These reactions are irrational and lar gely outside people’ s control.
Intense and barely controllable ur ges and emotions make people feel crazy
—and makes them feel they don’ t belong to the human race. Feeling numb
during birthday parties for your kids or in response to the death of loved
ones makes people feel like monsters. As a result, shame becomes the
dominant emotion and hiding the truth the central preoccupation.
They are rarely in touch with the origins of their alienation. That is
where therapy comes in—is the beginning of bringing the emotions that
were generated by trauma being able to feel, the capacity to observe oneself
online. However , the bottom line is that the threat-perception system of the
brain has changed, and people’ s physical reactions are dictated by the
imprint of the past.
The trauma that started “out there” is now played out on the battlefield
of their own bodies, usually without a conscious connection between what
happened back then and what is going on right now inside. The challenge is
not so much learning to accept the terrible things that have happened but
learning how to gain mastery over one’ s internal sensations and emotions.
Sensing, naming, and identifying what is going on inside is the first step to
recovery .
THE SMOKE DETECT OR GOES ON OVERDRIVEStan’ s brain scan shows his flashback in action. This is what reliving trauma
looks like in the brain: the brightly lit area in the lower right-hand corner ,
the blanked-out lower left side, and the four symmetrical white holes
around the center . (Y ou may recognize the lit-up amygdala and the of f-line
left brain from the Harvard study discussed in chapter 3.) Stan’ s amygdala
made no distinction between past and present. It activated just as if the car
crash were happening in the scanner , triggering powerful stress hormones
and nervous-system responses. These were responsible for his sweating and
trembling, his racing heart and elevated blood pressure: entirely normal and
potentially lifesaving responses if a truck has just smashed into your car .
Imaging a flashback with fMRI.  Notice how much more activity appears on the right side
than on the left.
It’ s important to have an ef ficient smoke detector: Y ou don’ t want to
get caught unawares by a raging fire. But if you go into a frenzy every timeyou smell smoke, it becomes intensely disruptive. Y es, you need to detect
whether somebody is getting upset with you, but if your amygdala goes into
overdrive, you may become chronically scared that people hate you, or you
may feel like they are out to get you.
THE TIMEKEEPER COLLAPSES
Both Stan and Ute had become hypersensitive and irritable after the
accident, suggesting that their prefrontal cortex was struggling to maintain
control in the face of stress. Stan’ s flashback precipitated a more extreme
reaction.
The two white areas in the front of the brain (on top in the picture) are
the right and left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. When those areas are
deactivated, people lose their sense of time and become trapped in the
moment, without a sense of past, present, or future.16
T wo brain systems are relevant for the mental processing of trauma:
those dealing with emotional intensity and context. Emotional intensity is
defined by the smoke alarm, the amygdala, and its counterweight, the
watchtower , the medial prefrontal cortex. The context and meaning of an
experience are determined by the system that includes the dorsolateral
prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) and the hippocampus. The DLPFC is located to
the side in the front brain, while the MPFC is in the center . The structures
along the midline of the brain are devoted to your inner experience of
yourself, those on the side are more concerned with your relationship with
your surroundings.
The DLPFC tells us how our present experience relates to the past and
how it may af fect the future—you can think of it as the timekeeper of the
brain. Knowing that whatever is happening is finite and will sooner or later
come to an end makes most experiences tolerable. The opposite is also true
—situations become intolerable if they feel interminable. Most of us know
from sad personal experience that terrible grief is typically accompanied by
the sense that this wretched state will last forever , and that we will never get
over our loss. T rauma is the ultimate experience of “this will last forever .”
Stan’ s scan reveals why people can recover from trauma only when the
brain structures that were knocked out during the original experience—which is why the event registered in the brain as trauma in the first place—
are fully online. V isiting the past in therapy should be done while people
are, biologically speaking, firmly rooted in the present and feeling as calm,
safe, and grounded as possible. (“Grounded” means that you can feel your
butt in your chair , see the light coming through the window , feel the tension
in your calves, and hear the wind stirring the tree outside.) Being anchored
in the present while revisiting the trauma opens the possibility of deeply
knowing that the terrible events belong to the past. For that to happen, the
brain’ s watchtower , cook, and timekeeper need to be online. Therapy won’ t
work as long as people keep being pulled back into the past.
THE THALAMUS SHUTS DOWN
Look again at the scan of Stan’ s flashback, and you can see two more white
holes in the lower half of the brain. These are his right and left thalamus—
blanked out during the flashback as they were during the original trauma.
As I’ve said, the thalamus functions as a “cook”—a relay station that
collects sensations from the ears, eyes, and skin and integrates them into the
soup that is our autobiographical memory . Breakdown of the thalamus
explains why trauma is primarily remembered not as a story , a narrative
with a beginning middle and end, but as isolated sensory imprints: images,
sounds, and physical sensations that are accompanied by intense emotions,
usually terror and helplessness.17
In normal circumstances the thalamus also acts as a filter or gatekeeper .
This makes it a central component of attention, concentration, and new
learning—all of which are compromised by trauma. As you sit here reading,
you may hear music in the background or traf fic rumbling by or feel a faint
gnawing in your stomach telling you it’ s time for a snack. If you are able to
stay focused on this page, your thalamus is helping you distinguish between
sensory information that is relevant and information that you can safely
ignore. In chapter 19, on neurofeedback, I’ll discuss some of the tests we
use to measure how well this gating system works, as well as ways to
strengthen it.
People with PTSD have their floodgates wide open. Lacking a filter ,
they are on constant sensory overload. In order to cope, they try to shutthemselves down and develop tunnel vision and hyperfocus. If they can’ t
shut down naturally , they may enlist drugs or alcohol to block out the
world. The tragedy is that the price of closing down includes filtering out
sources of pleasure and joy , as well.
DEPERSONALIZA TION: SPLIT OFF FROM THE SELF
Let’ s now look at Ute’ s experience in the scanner . Not all people react to
trauma in exactly the same way , but in this case the dif ference is
particularly dramatic, since Ute was sitting right next to Stan in the wrecked
car . She responded to her trauma script by going numb: Her mind went
blank, and nearly every area of her brain showed markedly decreased
activity . Her heart rate and blood pressure didn’ t elevate. When asked how
she’d felt during the scan, she replied: “I felt just like I felt at the time of the
accident: I felt nothing.”Blanking out (dissociation) in r esponse to being r eminded of past trauma.  In this case
almost every area of the brain has decreased activation, interfering with thinking, focus, and
orientation.
The medical term for Ute’ s response is depersonalization .18 Anyone
who deals with traumatized men, women, or children is sooner or later
confronted with blank stares and absent minds, the outward manifestation
of the biological freeze reaction. Depersonalization is one symptom of the
massive dissociation created by trauma. Stan’ s flashbacks came from his
thwarted ef forts to escape the crash—cued by the script, all his dissociated,
fragmented sensations and emotions roared back into the present. But
instead of struggling to escape, Ute had dissociated her fear and felt
nothing.I see depersonalization regularly in my of fice when patients tell me
horrendous stories without any feeling. All the ener gy drains out of the
room, and I have to make a valiant ef fort to keep paying attention. A lifeless
patient forces you to work much harder to keep the therapy alive, and I
often used to pray for the hour to be over quickly .
After seeing Ute’ s scan, I started to take a very dif ferent approach
toward blanked-out patients. W ith nearly every part of their brains tuned
out, they obviously cannot think, feel deeply , remember , or make sense out
of what is going on. Conventional talk therapy , in those circumstances, is
virtually useless.
In Ute’ s case it was possible to guess why she responded so dif ferently
from Stan. She was utilizing a survival strategy her brain had learned in
childhood to cope with her mother ’ s harsh treatment. Ute’ s father died when
she was nine years old, and her mother subsequently was often nasty and
demeaning to her . At some point Ute discovered that she could blank out
her mind when her mother yelled at her . Thirty-five years later , when she
was trapped in her demolished car , Ute’ s brain automatically went into the
same survival mode—she made herself disappear .
The challenge for people like Ute is to become alert and engaged, a
dif ficult but unavoidable task if they want to recapture their lives. (Ute
herself did recover—she wrote a book about her experiences and started a
successful journal called Mental Fitness .) This is where a bottom-up
approach to therapy becomes essential. The aim is actually to change the
patient’ s physiology , his or her relationship to bodily sensations. At the
T rauma Center we work with such basic measures as heart rate and
breathing patterns. W e help patients evoke and notice bodily sensations by
tapping acupressure19 points. Rhythmic interactions with other people are
also ef fective—tossing a beach ball back and forth, bouncing on a Pilates
ball, drumming, or dancing to music.
Numbing is the other side of the coin in PTSD. Many untreated trauma
survivors start out like Stan, with explosive flashbacks, then numb out later
in life. While reliving trauma is dramatic, frightening, and potentially self-
destructive, over time a lack of presence can be even more damaging. This
is a particular problem with traumatized children. The acting-out kids tendto get attention; the blanked-out ones don’ t bother anybody and are left to
lose their future bit by bit.
LEARNING T O LIVE IN THE PRESENT
The challenge of trauma treatment is not only dealing with the past but,
even more, enhancing the quality of day-to-day experience. One reason that
traumatic memories become dominant in PTSD is that it’ s so dif ficult to
feel truly alive right now . When you can’ t be fully here, you go to the
places where you did feel alive—even if those places are filled with horror
and misery .
Many treatment approaches for traumatic stress focus on desensitizing
patients to their past, with the expectation that reexposure to their traumas
will reduce emotional outbursts and flashbacks. I believe that this is based
on a misunderstanding of what happens in traumatic stress. W e must most
of all help our patients to live fully and securely in the present. In order to
do that, we need to help bring those brain structures that deserted them
when they were overwhelmed by trauma back. Desensitization may make
you less reactive, but if you cannot feel satisfaction in ordinary everyday
things like taking a walk, cooking a meal, or playing with your kids, life
will pass you by .TC H A P T E R  5
B O D Y - B R A I N  C O N N E C T I O N S
Life is about rhythm. W e vibrate, our hearts are pumping blood.
W e are a rhythm machine, that’ s what we are.
—Mickey Hart
oward the end of his career , in 1872, Charles Darwin published The
Expr ession of the Emotions in Man and Animals.1 Until recently most
scientific discussion of Darwin’ s theories has focused on On  the Origin of
Species  (1859) and The Descent of Man  (1871) . But The  Expr ession of the
Emotions  turns out to be an extraordinary exploration of the foundations of
emotional life, filled with observations and anecdotes drawn from decades
of inquiry , as well as close-to-home stories of Darwin’ s children and
household pets. It’ s also a landmark in book illustration—one of the first
books ever to include photographs. (Photography was still a relatively new
technology and, like most scientists, Darwin wanted to make use of the
latest techniques to make his points.) It’ s still in print today , readily
available in a recent edition with a terrific introduction and commentaries
by Paul Ekman, a modern pioneer in the study of emotions.
Darwin starts his discussion by noting the physical or ganization
common to all mammals, including human beings—the lungs, kidneys,
brains, digestive or gans, and sexual or gans that sustain and continue life.
Although many scientists today would accuse him of anthropomorphism,
Darwin stands with animal lovers when he proclaims: “Man and the higheranimals . . . [also] have instincts in common. All have the same senses,
intuition, sensation, passions, af fections, and emotions, even the more
complex ones such as jealousy , suspicion, emulation, gratitude, and
magnanimity .”2 He observes that we humans share some of the physical
signs of animal emotion. Feeling the hair on the back of your neck stand up
when you’re frightened or baring your teeth when you’re enraged can only
be understood as vestiges of a long evolutionary process.
“When a man sneers or snarls at another , is the corner of the canine or eye tooth raised on the
side facing the man whom he addresses?” —Charles Darwin, 1872
For Darwin mammalian emotions are fundamentally rooted in biology:
They are the indispensable source of motivation to initiate action. Emotions
(from the Latin emover e —to move out) give shape and direction to
whatever we do, and their primary expression is through the muscles of the
face and body . These facial and physical movements communicate our
mental state and intention to others: Angry expressions and threatening
postures caution them to back of f. Sadness attracts care and attention. Fear
signals helplessness or alerts us to danger .
W e instinctively read the dynamic between two people simply from
their tension or relaxation, their postures and tone of voice, their changing
facial expressions. W atch a movie in a language you don’ t know , and you
can still guess the quality of the relationship between the characters. W e
often can read other mammals (monkeys, dogs, horses) in the same way .
Darwin goes on to observe that the fundamental purpose of emotions is
to initiate movement that will restore the or ganism to safety and physical
equilibrium. Here is his comment on the origin of what today we would call
PTSD:Behaviors to avoid or escape from danger have clearly evolved to
render each or ganism competitive in terms of survival. But
inappropriately prolonged escape or avoidance behavior would put
the animal at a disadvantage in that successful species preservation
demands reproduction which, in turn, depends upon feeding,
shelter and mating activities all of which are reciprocals of
avoidance and escape.3
In other words: If an or ganism is stuck in survival mode, its ener gies
are focused on fighting of f unseen enemies, which leaves no room for
nurture, care, and love. For us humans, it means that as long as the mind is
defending itself against invisible assaults, our closest bonds are threatened,
along with our ability to imagine, plan, play , learn, and pay attention to
other people’ s needs.
Darwin also wrote about body-brain connections that we are still
exploring today . Intense emotions involve not only the mind but also the gut
and the heart: “Heart, guts, and brain communicate intimately via the
‘pneumogastric’ nerve, the critical nerve involved in the expression and
management of emotions in both humans and animals. When the mind is
strongly excited, it instantly af fects the state of the viscera; so that under
excitement there will be much mutual action and reaction between these,
the two most important or gans of the body .”4
The first time I encountered this passage, I reread it with growing
excitement. Of course we experience our most devastating emotions as gut-
wrenching feelings and heartbreak. As long as we register emotions
primarily in our heads, we can remain pretty much in control, but feeling as
if our chest is caving in or we’ve been punched in the gut is unbearable.
W e’ll do anything to make these awful visceral sensations go away , whether
it is clinging desperately to another human being, rendering ourselves
insensible with drugs or alcohol, or taking a knife to the skin to replace
overwhelming emotions with definable sensations. How many mental
health problems, from drug addiction to self-injurious behavior , start as
attempts to cope with the unbearable physical pain of our emotions? If
Darwin was right, the solution requires finding ways to help people alter the
inner sensory landscape of their bodies.Until recently , this bidirectional communication between body and
mind was lar gely ignored by W estern science, even as it had long been
central to traditional healing practices in many other parts of the world,
notably in India and China. T oday it is transforming our understanding of
trauma and recovery .
A WINDOW INT O THE NER V OUS SYSTEM
All of the little signs we instinctively register during a conversation—the
muscle shifts and tensions in the other person’ s face, eye movements and
pupil dilation, pitch and speed of the voice—as well as the fluctuations in
our own inner landscape—salivation, swallowing, breathing, and heart rate
—are linked by a single regulatory system.5 All are a product of the
synchrony between the two branches of the autonomic nervous system
(ANS): the sympathetic, which acts as the body’ s accelerator , and the
parasympathetic, which serves as its brake.6 These are the “reciprocals”
Darwin spoke of, and working together they play an important role in
managing the body’ s ener gy flow , one preparing for its expenditure, the
other for its conservation.
The sympathetic nervous system (SNS) is responsible for arousal,
including the fight-or -flight response (Darwin’ s “escape or avoidance
behavior”). Almost two thousand years ago the Roman physician Galen
gave it the name “sympathetic” because he observed that it functioned with
the emotions ( sym  pathos ). The SNS moves blood to the muscles for quick
action, partly by triggering the adrenal glands to squirt out adrenaline,
which speeds up the heart rate and increases blood pressure.
The second branch of the ANS is the parasympathetic (“against
emotions”) nervous system (PNS), which  promotes self-preservative
functions like digestion and wound healing. It triggers the release of
acetylcholine to put a brake on arousal, slowing the heart down, relaxing
muscles, and returning breathing to normal. As Darwin pointed out,
“feeding, shelter , and mating activities” depend on the PNS.
There is a simple way to experience these two systems for yourself.
Whenever you take a deep  breath, you activate the SNS. The resulting burst
of adrenaline speeds up your heart, which explains why many athletes takea few short, deep breaths before starting competition. Exhaling, in turn,
activates the PNS, which slows down the heart. If you take a yoga or a
meditation class, your instructor will probably ur ge you to pay particular
attention to the exhalation, since deep, long breaths out help calm you
down.  As we breathe, we continually speed up and slow down the heart,
and because of that the interval between two successive heartbeats is never
precisely the same. A measurement called heart rate variability (HR V) can
be used to test the flexibility of this system, and good HR V—the more
fluctuation, the better—is a sign that the brake and accelerator in your
arousal system are both functioning properly and in balance.  W e had a
breakthrough when we acquired an instrument to measure HR V , and I will
explain in chapter 16 how we can use HR V to help treat PTSD.
THE NEURAL LOVE CODE7
In 1994 Stephen Por ges, who was a researcher at the University of
Maryland at the time we started our investigation of HR V , and who is now
at the University of North Carolina, introduced the Polyvagal Theory ,
which built on Darwin’ s observations and added another 140 years of
scientific discoveries to those early insights. ( Polyvagal  refers to the many
branches of the vagus nerve—Darwin’ s “pneumogastric nerve”—which
connects numerous or gans, including the brain, lungs, heart, stomach, and
intestines.) The Polyvagal Theory provided us with a more sophisticated
understanding of the biology of safety and danger , one based on the subtle
interplay between the visceral experiences of our own bodies and the voices
and faces of the people around us. It explained why a kind face or a
soothing tone of voice can dramatically alter the way we feel. It clarified
why knowing that we are seen and heard by the important people in our
lives can make us feel calm and safe, and why being ignored or dismissed
can precipitate rage reactions or mental collapse. It helped us understand
why focused attunement with another person can shift us out of
disor ganized and fearful states.8
In short, Por ges’ s theory made us look beyond the ef fects of fight or
flight and put social relationships front and center in our understanding oftrauma. It also suggested new approaches to healing that focus on
strengthening the body’ s system for regulating arousal.
Human beings are astoundingly attuned to subtle emotional shifts in the
people (and animals) around them. Slight changes in the tension of the
brow , wrinkles around the eyes, curvature of the lips, and angle of the neck
quickly signal to us how comfortable, suspicious, relaxed, or frightened
someone is.9 Our mirror neurons register their inner experience, and our
own bodies make internal adjustments to whatever we notice. Just so, the
muscles of our own faces give others clues about how calm or excited we
feel, whether our heart is racing or quiet, and whether we’re ready to
pounce on them or run away . When the message we receive from another
person is “Y ou’re safe with me,” we relax. If we’re lucky in our
relationships, we also feel nourished, supported, and restored as we look
into the face and eyes of the other .
Our culture teaches us to focus on personal uniqueness, but at a deeper
level we barely exist as individual or ganisms. Our brains are built to help us
function as members of a tribe. W e are part of that tribe even when we are
by ourselves, whether listening to music (that other people created),
watching a basketball game on television (our own muscles tensing as the
players run and jump), or preparing a spreadsheet for a sales meeting
(anticipating the boss’ s reactions). Most of our ener gy is devoted to
connecting with others.
If we look beyond the list of specific symptoms that entail formal
psychiatric diagnoses, we find that almost all mental suf fering involves
either trouble in creating workable and satisfying relationships or
dif ficulties in regulating arousal (as in the case of habitually becoming
enraged, shut down, overexcited, or disor ganized). Usually it’ s a
combination of both. The standard medical focus on trying to discover the
right drug to treat a particular “disorder” tends to distract us from grappling
with how our problems interfere with our functioning as members of our
tribe.
SAFETY AND RECIPROCITYA few years ago I heard Jerome Kagan, a distinguished emeritus professor
of child psychology at Harvard, say to the Dalai Lama that for every act of
cruelty in this world there are hundreds of small acts of kindness and
connection. His conclusion: “T o be benevolent rather than malevolent is
probably a true feature of our species.” Being able to feel safe with other
people is probably the single most important aspect of mental health; safe
connections are fundamental to meaningful and satisfying lives. Numerous
studies of disaster response around the globe have shown that social support
is the most powerful protection against becoming overwhelmed by stress
and trauma.
Social support is not the same as merely being in the presence of
others. The critical issue is r ecipr ocity : being truly heard and seen by the
people around us, feeling that we are held in someone else’ s mind and heart.
For our physiology to calm down, heal, and grow we need a visceral feeling
of safety . No doctor can write a prescription for friendship and love: These
are complex and hard-earned capacities. Y ou don’ t need a history of trauma
to feel self-conscious and even panicked at a party with strangers—but
trauma can turn the whole world into a gathering of aliens.
Many traumatized people find themselves chronically out of sync with
the people around them. Some find comfort in groups where they can replay
their combat experiences, rape, or torture with others who have similar
backgrounds or experiences. Focusing on a shared history of trauma and
victimization alleviates their searing sense of isolation, but usually at the
price of having to deny their individual dif ferences: Members can belong
only if they conform to the common code.
Isolating oneself into a narrowly defined victim group promotes a view
of others as irrelevant at best and dangerous at worst, which eventually only
leads to further alienation. Gangs, extremist political parties, and religious
cults may provide solace, but they rarely foster the mental flexibility needed
to be fully open to what life has to of fer and as such cannot liberate their
members from their traumas. W ell-functioning people are able to accept
individual dif ferences and acknowledge the humanity of others.
In the past two decades it has become widely recognized that when
adults or children are too skittish or shut down to derive comfort from
human beings, relationships with other mammals can help. Dogs and horses
and even dolphins of fer less complicated companionship while providingthe necessary sense of safety . Dogs and horses, in particular , are now
extensively used to treat some groups of trauma patients.10
THREE LEVELS OF SAFETY
After trauma the world is experienced with a dif ferent nervous system that
has an altered perception of risk and safety . Por ges coined the word
“neuroception” to describe the capacity to evaluate relative danger and
safety in one’ s environment. When we try to help people with faulty
neuroception, the great challenge is finding ways to  reset their physiology ,
so that their survival mechanisms stop working against them. This means
helping them to respond appropriately to danger but, even more, to recover
the capacity to experience safety , relaxation, and true reciprocity .
I have extensively interviewed and treated six people who survived
plane crashes. T wo reported having lost consciousness during the incident;
even though they were not physically injured, they collapsed mentally . T wo
went into a panic and stayed frantic until well after we had started
treatment. T wo remained calm and resourceful and helped evacuate fellow
passengers from the burning wreckage. I’ve found a similar range of
responses in survivors of rape, car crashes, and torture. In the previous
chapter we saw the radically dif ferent reactions of Stan and Ute as they
relived the highway disaster they’d experienced side by side. What accounts
for this spectrum of responses: focused, collapsed, or frantic?
Por ges’ s theory provides an explanation: The autonomic nervous
system regulates three fundamental physiological states. The level of safety
determines which one of these is activated at any particular time. Whenever
we feel threatened, we instinctively turn to the first level, social
engagement . W e call out for help, support, and comfort from the people
around us. But if no one comes to our aid, or we’re in immediate danger ,
the or ganism reverts to a more primitive way to survive: fight or flight.  W e
fight of f our attacker , or we run to a safe place. However , if this fails—we
can’ t get away , we’re held down or trapped—the or ganism tries to preserve
itself by shutting down and expending as little ener gy as possible. W e are
then in a state of fr eeze  or collapse .This is where the many-branched vagus nerve comes in, and I’ll
describe its anatomy briefly because it’ s central to understanding how
people deal with trauma. The social-engagement system depends on nerves
that have their origin in the brain stem regulatory centers,  primarily the
vagus—also known as the tenth cranial nerve—together with adjoining
nerves that activate the muscles of the face, throat, middle ear , and voice
box or larynx. When the “ventral vagal complex” (VVC) runs the show , we
smile when others smile at us, we nod our heads when we agree, and we
frown when friends tell us of their misfortunes. When the VVC is engaged,
it also sends signals down to our heart and lungs, slowing down our heart
rate and increasing the depth of breathing. As a result, we feel calm and
relaxed, centered, or pleasurably aroused.
The many-branched vagus.  The vagus nerve (which Darwin called the pneumogastric nerve)
registers heartbreak and gut-wrenching feelings. When a person becomes upset, the throat getsdry , the voice becomes tense, the heart speeds up, and respiration becomes rapid and shallow .
COUR TESY OF NED KALIN, MD
Thr ee r esponses to thr eat.
1.  The social engagement system: an alarmed monkey signals danger and calls for help. VVC.
2.  Fight or flight: T eeth bared, the face of rage and terror . SNS.
3.  Collapse: The body signals defeat and withdraws. DVC.
Any threat to our safety or social connections triggers changes in the
areas innervated by the VVC. When something distressing happens, we
automatically signal our upset in our facial expressions and tone of voice,
changes meant to beckon others to come to our assistance.1 1 However , if no
one responds to our call for help, the threat increases, and the older limbic
brain jumps in. The sympathetic nervous system takes over , mobilizing
muscles, heart, and lungs for fight or flight.12 Our voice becomes faster and
more strident and our heart starts pumping faster . If a dog is in the room,
she will stir and growl, because she can smell the activation of our sweat
glands.
Finally , if there’ s no way out, and there’ s nothing we can do to stave of f
the inevitable, we will activate the ultimate emer gency system: the dorsal
vagal complex (DVC). This system reaches down below the diaphragm to
the stomach, kidneys, and intestines and drastically reduces metabolism
throughout the body . Heart rate plunges (we feel our heart “drop”), we can’ t
breathe, and our gut stops working or empties (literally “scaring the shit out
of” us). This is the point at which we disengage, collapse, and freeze.
FIGHT OR FLIGHT VERSUS COLLAPSEAs we saw in Stan’ s and Ute’ s brain scans, trauma is expressed not only as
fight or flight but also as shutting down and failing to engage in the present.
A dif ferent level of brain activity is involved for each response: the
mammalian fight-or -flight system, which is protective and keeps us from
shutting down, and the reptilian brain, which produces the collapse
response. Y ou can see the dif ference between these two systems at any big
pet store. Kittens, puppies, mice and gerbils constantly play around, and
when they’re tired they huddle together , skin to skin, in a pile. In contrast,
the snakes and lizards lie motionless in the corners of their cages,
unresponsive to the environment.13 This sort of immobilization, generated
by the reptilian brain, characterizes many chronically traumatized people, as
opposed to the mammalian panic and rage that make more recent trauma
survivors so frightened and frightening.
Almost everyone knows what that quintessential fight/flight response,
road rage, feels like: A sudden threat precipitates an intense impulse to
move and attack. Danger turns of f our social-engagement system, decreases
our responsiveness to the human voice, and increases our sensitivity to
threatening sounds. Y et for many people panic and rage are preferable to the
opposite: shutting down and becoming dead to the world. Activating
flight/flight at least makes them feel ener gized. That is why so many abused
and traumatized people feel fully alive in the face of actual danger , while
they go numb in situations that are more complex but objectively safe, like
birthday parties or family dinners.
When fighting or running does not take care of the threat, we activate
the last resort—the reptilian brain, the ultimate emer gency system. This
system is most likely to engage when we are physically immobilized, as
when we are pinned down by an attacker or when a child has no escape
from a terrifying caregiver . Collapse and disengagement are controlled by
the DVC, an evolutionarily ancient part of the parasympathetic nervous
system that is associated with digestive symptoms like diarrhea and nausea.
It also slows down the heart and induces shallow breathing. Once this
system takes over , other people,  and we ourselves, cease to matter .
A wareness is shut down, and we may no longer even register physical pain.
HOW WE BECOME HUMANIn Por ges’ s grand theory the VVC evolved in mammals to support an
increasingly complex social life. All mammals, including human beings,
band together to mate, nurture their young, defend against common
enemies, and coordinate hunting and food acquisition.  The more ef ficiently
the VVC synchronizes the activity of the sympathetic and parasympathetic
nervous systems, the better the physiology of each individual will be
attuned to that of other members of the tribe.
Thinking about the VVC in this way illuminates how parents naturally
help their kids to regulate themselves. Newborn babies are not very social;
they sleep most of the time and wake up when they’re hungry or wet. After
having been fed they may spend a little time looking around, fussing, or
staring, but they will soon be asleep again, following their own internal
rhythms. Early in life they are pretty much at the mercy of the alternating
tides of their sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems, and their
reptilian brain runs most of the show .
But day by day , as we coo and smile and cluck at them, we stimulate
the growth of synchronicity in the developing VVC. These interactions help
to bring our babies’ emotional arousal systems into sync with their
surroundings. The VVC controls sucking, swallowing, facial expression,
and the sounds produced by the larynx. When these functions are stimulated
in an infant, they are accompanied by a sense of pleasure and safety , which
helps create the foundation for all future social behavior .14 As my friend Ed
T ronick taught me a long time ago, the brain is a cultural or gan—
experience shapes the brain.
Being in tune with other members of our species via the VVC is
enormously rewarding. What begins as the attuned play of mother and child
continues with the rhythmicity of a good basketball game, the synchrony of
tango dancing, and the harmony of choral singing or playing a piece of jazz
or chamber music—all of which foster a deep sense of pleasure and
connection.
W e can speak of trauma when that system fails: when you beg for your
life, but the assailant ignores your pleas; when you are a terrified child lying
in bed, hearing your mother scream as her boyfriend beats her up; when you
see your buddy trapped under a piece of metal that you’re not strong
enough to lift; when you want to push away the priest who is abusing you,but you’re afraid you’ll be punished. Immobilization is at the root of most
traumas. When that occurs the DVC is likely to take over: Y our heart slows
down, your breathing becomes shallow , and, zombielike, you lose touch
with yourself and your surroundings. Y ou dissociate, faint and collapse.
DEFEND OR RELAX?
Steve Por ges helped me realize that the natural state of mammals is to be
somewhat on guard. However , in order to feel emotionally close to another
human being, our defensive system must temporarily shut down. In order to
play , mate, and nurture our young, the brain needs to turn of f its natural
vigilance.
Many traumatized individuals are too hypervigilant to enjoy the
ordinary pleasures that life has to of fer , while others are too numb to absorb
new experiences—or to be alert to signs of real danger . When the smoke
detectors of the brain malfunction, people no longer run when they should
be trying to escape or fight back when they should be defending
themselves. The landmark ACE (Adverse Childhood Experiences) study ,
which I’ll discuss in more detail in chapter 9, showed that women who had
an early history of abuse and neglect were seven times more likely to be
raped in adulthood. W omen who, as children, had witnessed their mothers
being assaulted by their partners had a vastly increased chance to fall victim
to domestic violence.15
Many people feel safe as long as they can limit their social contact to
superficial conversations, but actual physical contact can trigger intense
reactions. However , as Por ges points out, achieving any sort of deep
intimacy—a close embrace, sleeping with a mate, and sex—requires
allowing oneself to experience immobilization without fear .16 It is
especially challenging for traumatized people to discern when they are
actually safe and to be able to activate their defenses when they are in
danger . This requires having experiences that can restore the sense of
physical safety , a topic to which we’ll return many times in the chapters that
follow .NEW APPROACHES T O TREA TMENT
If we understand that traumatized children and adults get stuck in
fight/flight or in chronic shut-down, how do we help them to deactivate
these defensive maneuvers that once ensured their survival?
Some gifted people who work with trauma survivors know how to do
this intuitively . Steve Gross used to run the play program at the T rauma
Center . Steve often walked around the clinic with a brightly colored beach
ball, and when he saw angry or frozen kids in the waiting room, he would
flash them a big smile. The kids rarely responded. Then, a little later , he
would return and “accidentally” drop his ball close to where a kid was
sitting. As Steve leaned over to pick it up, he’d nudge it gently toward the
kid, who’d usually give a halfhearted push in return. Gradually Steve got a
back-and-forth going, and before long you’d see smiles on both faces.
From simple, rhythmically attuned movements, Steve had created a
small, safe place where the social-engagement system could begin to
reemer ge. In the same way , severely traumatized people may get more out
of simply helping to arrange chairs before a meeting or joining others in
tapping out a musical rhythm on the chair seats than they would from sitting
in those same chairs and discussing the failures in their life.
One thing is certain: Y elling at someone who is already out of control
can only lead to further dysregulation. Just as your dog cowers if you shout
and wags his tail when you speak in a high singsong, we humans respond to
harsh voices with fear , anger , or shutdown and to playful tones by opening
up and relaxing. W e simply cannot help but respond to these indicators of
safety or danger .
Sadly , our educational system, as well as many of the methods that
profess to treat trauma, tend to bypass this emotional-engagement system
and focus instead on recruiting the cognitive capacities of the mind. Despite
the well-documented ef fects of anger , fear , and anxiety on the ability to
reason, many programs continue to ignore the need to engage the safety
system of the brain before trying to promote new ways of thinking. The last
things that should be cut from school schedules are chorus, physical
education, recess, and anything else involving movement, play , and joyful
engagement. When children are oppositional, defensive, numbed out, or
enraged, it’ s also important to recognize that such “bad behavior” mayrepeat action patterns that were established to survive serious threats, even
if they are intensely upsetting or of f-putting.
Por ges’ s work has had a profound ef fect on how my T rauma Center
colleagues and I or ganize the treatment of abused children and traumatized
adults. It’ s true that we would probably have developed a therapeutic yoga
program for women at some point, given that yoga had proved so successful
in helping them calm down and get in touch with their dissociated bodies.
W e would also have been likely to experiment with a theater program in the
Boston inner -city schools, with a karate program for rape survivors called
impact model mugging, and with play techniques and body modalities like
sensory stimulation that have now been used with survivors around the
world. (All of these and more will be explored in part 5.)
But the polyvagal theory helped us understand and explain why  all
these disparate, unconventional techniques worked so well. It enabled us to
become more conscious of combining top-down approaches (to activate
social engagement) with bottom-up methods (to calm the physical tensions
in the body). W e were more open to the value of other age-old,
nonpharmacological approaches to health that have long been practiced
outside W estern medicine, ranging from breath exercises (pranayama) and
chanting to martial arts like qigong to drumming and group singing and
dancing. All rely on interpersonal rhythms, visceral awareness, and vocal
and facial communication, which help shift people out of fight/flight states,
reor ganize their perception of danger , and increase their capacity to manage
relationships.
The body keeps the score:17 If the memory of trauma is encoded in the
viscera, in heartbreaking and gut-wrenching emotions, in autoimmune
disorders and skeletal/muscular problems, and if mind/brain/visceral
communication is the royal road to emotion regulation, this demands a
radical shift in our therapeutic assumptions.SC H A P T E R  6
L O S I N G  Y O U R  B O D Y ,  L O S I N G  Y O U R
S E L F
Be patient toward all that is unsolved in your heart and try to love
the questions themselves. . . . Live the questions now . Perhaps you
will gradually , without noticing it, live along some distant day into
the answer .
—Rainer Maria Rilke, Letters to a Y oung Poet
herry walked into my of fice with her shoulders slumped ,  her chin
nearly touching her chest. Even before we spoke a word, her body was
telling me that she was afraid to face the world. I also noticed that her long
sleeves only partially covered the scabs on her forearms. After sitting down,
she told me in a high-pitched monotone that she couldn’ t stop herself from
picking at the skin on her arms and chest until she bled.
As far back as Sherry could remember , her mother had run a foster
home, and their house was often packed with as many as fifteen strange,
disruptive, frightened, and frightening kids who disappeared as suddenly as
they arrived. Sherry had grown up taking care of these transient children,
feeling that there was no room for her and her needs. “I know I wasn’ t
wanted,” she told me. “I’m not sure when I first realized that, but I’ve
thought about things that my mother said to me, and the signs were always
there. She’d tell me, ‘Y ou know , I don’ t think you belong in this family . I
think they gave us the wrong baby .’ And she’d say it with a smile on herface. But, of course, people often pretend to joke when they say something
serious.”
Over the years our research team has repeatedly found that chronic
emotional abuse and neglect can be just as devastating as physical abuse
and sexual molestation.1 Sherry turned out to be a living example of these
findings: Not being seen, not being known, and having nowhere to turn to
feel safe is devastating at any age, but it is particularly destructive for
young children, who are still trying to find their place in the world.
Sherry had graduated from college, but she now worked in a joyless
clerical job, lived alone with her cats, and had no close friends. When I
asked her about men, she told me that her only “relationship” had been with
a man who’d kidnapped her while she was on a college vacation in Florida.
He’d held her captive and raped her repeatedly for five consecutive days.
She remembered having been curled up, terrified and frozen for most of that
time, until she realized she could try to get away . She escaped by simply
walking out while he was in the bathroom. When she called her mother
collect for help, her mother refused to take the call. Sherry finally managed
to get home with assistance from a domestic violence shelter .
Sherry told me that she’d started to pick at her skin because it gave her
some relief from feeling numb. The physical sensations made her feel more
alive but also deeply ashamed—she knew she was addicted to these actions
but could not stop them. She’d consulted many mental health professionals
before me and had been questioned repeatedly about her “suicidal
behavior .” She’d also been subjected to involuntary hospitalization by a
psychiatrist who refused to treat her unless she could promise that she
would never pick at herself again. However , in my experience, patients who
cut themselves or pick at their skin like Sherry , are seldom suicidal but are
trying to make themselves feel better in the only way they know .
This is a dif ficult concept for many people to understand. As I
discussed in the previous chapter , the most common response to distress is
to seek out people we like and trust to help us and give us the courage to go
on. W e may also calm down by engaging in a physical activity like biking
or going to the gym. W e start learning these ways of regulating our feelings
from the first moment someone feeds us when we’re hungry , covers us
when we’re cold, or rocks us when we’re hurt or scared.But if no one has ever looked at you with loving eyes or broken out in a
smile when she sees you; if no one has rushed to help you (but instead said,
“Stop crying, or I’ll give you something to cry about”), then you need to
discover other ways of taking care of yourself. Y ou are likely to experiment
with anything—drugs, alcohol, binge eating, or cutting—that of fers some
kind of relief.
While Sherry dutifully came to every appointment and answered my
questions with great sincerity , I did not feel we were making the sort of vital
connection that is necessary for therapy to work. Struck by how frozen and
uptight she was, I suggested that she see Liz, a massage therapist I had
worked with previously . During their first meeting Liz positioned Sherry on
the massage table, then moved to the end of the table and gently held
Sherry’ s feet. L ying there with her eyes closed, Sherry suddenly yelled in a
panic: “Where are you?” Somehow Sherry had lost track of Liz, even
though Liz was right there, with her hands on Sherry’ s feet.
Sherry was one of the first patients who taught me about the extreme
disconnection from the body that so many people with histories of trauma
and neglect experience. I discovered that my professional training, with its
focus on understanding and insight, had lar gely ignored the relevance of the
living, breathing body , the foundation of our selves. Sherry knew that
picking her skin was a destructive thing to do and that it was related to her
mother ’ s neglect, but understanding the source of the impulse made no
dif ference in helping her control it.
LOSING YOUR BODY
Once I was alerted to this, I was amazed to discover how many of my
patients told me they could not feel whole areas of their bodies. Sometimes
I’d ask them to close their eyes and tell me what I had put into their
outstretched hands. Whether it was a car key , a quarter , or a can opener ,
they often could not even guess what they were holding—their sensory
perceptions simply weren’ t working.
I talked this over with my friend Alexander McFarlane in Australia,
who had observed the same phenomenon. In his laboratory in Adelaide he
had studied the question: How do we know without looking at it that we’reholding a car key? Recognizing an object in the palm of your hand requires
sensing its shape, weight, temperature, texture, and position. Each of those
distinct sensory experiences is transmitted to a dif ferent part of the brain,
which then needs to integrate them into a single perception. McFarlane
found that people with PTSD often have trouble putting the picture
together .2
When our senses become muf fled, we no longer feel fully alive. In an
article called “What Is an Emotion?” (1884),3 W illiam James, the father of
American psychology , reported a striking case of “sensory insensibility” in
a woman he interviewed: “I have . . . no human sensations,” she told him.
“[I am] surrounded by all that can render life happy and agreeable, still to
me the faculty of enjoyment and of feeling is wanting. . . . Each of my
senses, each part of my proper self, is as it were separated from me and can
no longer af ford me any feeling; this impossibility seems to depend upon a
void which I feel in the front of my head, and to be due to the diminution of
the sensibility over the whole surface of my body , for it seems to me that I
never actually reach the objects which I touch. All this would be a small
matter enough, but for its frightful result, which is that of the impossibility
of any other kind of feeling and of any sort of enjoyment, although I
experience a need and desire of them that render my life an
incomprehensible torture.”
This response to trauma raises an important question: How can
traumatized people learn to integrate ordinary sensory experiences so that
they can live with the natural flow of feeling and feel secure and complete
in their bodies?
HOW DO WE KNOW WE’RE ALIVE?
Most early neuroimaging studies of traumatized people were like those
we’ve seen in chapter 3; they focused on how subjects reacted to specific
reminders of the trauma. Then, in 2004, my colleague Ruth Lanius, who
scanned Stan and Ute Lawrence’ s brains, posed a new question: What
happens in the brains of trauma survivors when they are not  thinking about
the past? Her studies on the idling brain, the “default state network” (DSN),opened up a whole new chapter in understanding how trauma af fects self-
awareness, specifically sensory self-awareness.4
Dr . Lanius recruited a group of sixteen “normal” Canadians to lie in a
brain scanner while thinking about nothing in particular . This is not easy for
anyone to do—as long as we are awake, our brains are churning—but she
asked them to focus their attention on their breathing and try to empty their
minds as much as possible. She then repeated the same experiment with
eighteen people who had histories of severe, chronic childhood abuse.
What is your brain doing when you have nothing in particular on your
mind? It turns out that you pay attention to yourself: The default state
activates the brain areas that work together to create your sense of “self.”
When Ruth looked at the scans of her normal subjects, she found
activation of DSN regions that previous researchers had described. I like to
call this the Mohawk of self-awareness, the midline structures of the brain,
starting out right above our eyes, running through the center of the brain all
the way to the back. All these midline structures are involved in our sense
of self. The lar gest bright region at the back of the brain is the posterior
cingulate, which gives us a physical sense of where we are—our internal
GPS. It is strongly connected to the medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), the
watchtower I discussed in chapter 4. (This connection doesn’ t show up on
the scan because the fMRI can’ t measure it.) It is also connected with brain
areas that register sensations coming from the rest of the body: the insula,
which relays messages from the viscera to the emotional centers; the
parietal lobes, which integrate sensory information; and the anterior
cingulate, which coordinates emotions and thinking. All of these areas
contribute to consciousness.Locating the self.  The Mohawk of self-awareness. Starting from the front of the brain (at
right), this consists of: the orbital prefrontal cortex, the medial prefrontal cortex, the anterior
cingulate, the posterior cingulate, and the insula. In individuals with histories of chronic trauma
the same regions show sharply decreased activity , making it dif ficult to register internal states
and assessing the personal relevance of incoming information.
The contrast with the scans of the eighteen chronic PTSD patients with
severe early-life trauma was startling. There was almost no activation of
any of the self-sensing areas of the brain: The MPFC, the anterior cingulate,
the parietal cortex, and the insula did not light up at all; the only area that
showed a slight activation was the posterior cingulate, which is responsible
for basic orientation in space.There could be only one explanation for such results: In response to the
trauma itself, and in coping with the dread that persisted long afterward,
these patients had learned to shut down the brain areas that transmit the
visceral feelings and emotions that accompany and define terror . Y et in
everyday life, those same brain areas are responsible for registering the
entire range of emotions and sensations that form the foundation of our self-
awareness, our sense of who we are. What we witnessed here was a tragic
adaptation: In an ef fort to shut of f terrifying sensations, they also deadened
their capacity to feel fully alive.
The disappearance of medial prefrontal activation could explain why so
many traumatized people lose their sense of purpose and direction. I used to
be surprised by how often my patients asked me for advice about the most
ordinary things, and then by how rarely they followed it. Now I understood
that their relationship with their own inner reality was impaired. How could
they make decisions, or put any plan into action, if they couldn’ t define
what they wanted or , to be more precise, what the sensations in their bodies,
the basis of all emotions, were trying to tell them?
The lack of self-awareness in victims of chronic childhood trauma is
sometimes so profound that they cannot recognize themselves in a mirror .
Brain scans show that this is not the result of mere inattention: The
structures in char ge of self-recognition may be knocked out along with the
structures related to self-experience.
When Ruth Lanius showed me her study , a phrase from my classical
high school education came back to me. The mathematician Archimedes,
teaching about the lever , is supposed to have said: “Give me a place to stand
and I will move the world.” Or , as the great twentieth-century body
therapist Moshe Feldenkrais put it: “Y ou can’ t do what you want till you
know what you’re doing.” The implications are clear: to feel present you
have to know where you are and be aware of what is going on with you. If
the self-sensing system breaks down we need to find ways to reactivate it.
THE SELF-SENSING SYSTEM
It was fascinating to see how much Sherry benefited from her massage
therapy . She felt more relaxed and adventurous in her day-to-day life andshe was also more relaxed and open with me. She became truly involved in
her therapy and was genuinely curious about her behavior , thoughts, and
feelings. She stopped picking at her skin, and when summer came she
started to spend evenings sitting outside on her stoop, chatting with her
neighbors. She even joined a church choir , a wonderful experience of group
synchrony .
It was at about this time that I met Antonio Damasio at a small think
tank that Dan Schacter , the chair of the psychology department at Harvard,
had or ganized. In a series of brilliant scientific articles and books Damasio
clarified the relationship among body states, emotions, and survival. A
neurologist who has treated hundreds of people with various forms of brain
damage, he became fascinated with consciousness and with identifying the
areas of the brain necessary for knowing what you feel. He has devoted his
career to mapping out what is responsible for our experience of “self.” The
Feeling of What Happens is, for me, his most important book, and reading
it was a revelation.5 Damasio starts by pointing out the deep divide between
our sense of self and the sensory life of our bodies. As he poetically
explains, “Sometimes we use our minds not to discover facts, but to hide
them. . . . One of the things the screen hides most ef fectively is the body ,
our own body , by which I mean the ins of it, its interiors. Like a veil thrown
over the skin to secure its modesty , the screen partially removes from the
mind the inner states of the body , those that constitute the flow of life as it
wanders in the journey of each day .”6
He goes on to describe how this “screen” can work in our favor by
enabling us to attend to pressing problems in the outside world. Y et it has a
cost: “It tends to prevent us from sensing the possible origin and nature of
what we call self.”7 Building on the century-old work of W illiam James,
Damasio ar gues that the core of our self-awareness rests on the physical
sensations that convey the inner states of the body:
[P]rimordial feelings provide a direct experience of one’ s own
living body , wordless, unadorned, and connected to nothing but
sheer existence. These primordial feelings reflect the current state
of the body along varied dimensions, . . . along the scale that
ranges from pleasure to pain, and they originate at the level of thebrain stem rather than the cerebral cortex. All feelings of emotion
are complex musical variations on primordial feelings.8
Our sensory world takes shape even before we are born. In the womb
we feel amniotic fluid against our skin, we hear the faint sounds of rushing
blood and a digestive tract at work, we pitch and roll with our mother ’ s
movements. After birth, physical sensation defines our relationship to
ourselves and to our surroundings. W e start of f being our wetness, hunger ,
satiation, and sleepiness. A cacophony of incomprehensible sounds and
images presses in on our pristine nervous system. Even after we acquire
consciousness and language, our bodily sensing system provides crucial
feedback on our moment-to-moment condition. Its constant hum
communicates changes in our viscera and in the muscles of our face, torso,
and extremities that signal pain and comfort, as well as ur ges such as
hunger and sexual arousal. What is taking place around us also af fects our
physical sensations. Seeing someone we recognize, hearing particular
sounds—a piece of music, a siren—or sensing a shift in temperature all
change our focus of attention and, without our being aware of it, prime our
subsequent thoughts and actions.
As we have seen, the job of the brain is to constantly monitor and
evaluate what is going on within and around us. These evaluations are
transmitted by chemical messages in the bloodstream and electrical
messages in our nerves, causing subtle or dramatic changes throughout the
body and brain. These shifts usually occur entirely without conscious input
or awareness: The subcortical regions of the brain are astoundingly ef ficient
in regulating our breathing, heartbeat, digestion, hormone secretion, and
immune system. However , these systems can become overwhelmed if we
are challenged by an ongoing threat, or even the perception of threat. This
accounts for the wide array of physical problems researchers have
documented in traumatized people.
Y et our conscious self also plays a vital role in maintaining our inner
equilibrium: W e need to register and act on our physical sensations to keep
our bodies safe. Realizing we’re cold compels us to put on a sweater;
feeling hungry or spacey tells us our blood sugar is low and spurs us to get
a snack; the pressure of a full bladder sends us to the bathroom. Damasiopoints out that all of the brain structures that register background feelings
are located near areas that control basic housekeeping functions, such as
breathing, appetite, elimination, and sleep/wake cycles: “This is because the
consequences of having emotion and attention are entirely related to the
fundamental business of managing life within the or ganism. It is not
possible to manage life and maintain homeostatic balance without data on
the current state of the or ganism’ s body .”9 Damasio calls these
housekeeping areas of the brain the “proto-self,” because they create the
“wordless knowledge” that underlies our conscious sense of self.
THE SELF UNDER THREA T
In 2000 Damasio and his colleagues published an article in the world’ s
foremost scientific publication, Science , which reported that reliving a
strong negative emotion causes significant changes in the brain areas that
receive nerve signals from the muscles, gut, and skin—areas that are crucial
for regulating basic bodily functions. The team’ s brain scans showed that
recalling an emotional event from the past causes us to actually
reexperience the visceral sensations felt during the original event. Each type
of emotion produced a characteristic pattern, distinct from the others. For
example, a particular part of the brain stem was “active in sadness and
anger , but not in happiness or fear .”10 All of these brain regions are below
the limbic system, to which emotions are traditionally assigned, yet we
acknowledge their involvement every time we use one of the common
expressions that link strong emotions with the body: “Y ou make me sick”;
“It made my skin crawl”; “I was all choked up”; “My heart sank”; “He
makes me bristle.”
The elementary self system in the brain stem and limbic system is
massively activated when people are faced with the threat of annihilation,
which results in an overwhelming sense of fear and terror accompanied by
intense physiological arousal. T o people who are reliving a trauma, nothing
makes sense; they are trapped in a life-or -death situation, a state of
paralyzing fear or blind rage. Mind and body are constantly aroused, as if
they are in imminent danger . They startle in response to the slightest noises
and are frustrated by small irritations. Their sleep is chronically disturbed,and food often loses its  sensual pleasures. This in turn can trigger desperate
attempts to shut those feelings down by freezing and dissociation.1 1
How do people regain control when their animal brains are stuck in a
fight for survival? If what goes on deep inside our animal brains dictates
how we feel, and if our body sensations are orchestrated by subcortical
(subconscious) brain structures, how much control over them can we
actually have?
AGENCY : OWNING YOUR LIFE
“Agency” is the technical term for the feeling of being in char ge of your
life: knowing where you stand, knowing that you have a say in what
happens to you, knowing that you have some ability to shape your
circumstances. The veterans who put their fists through drywall at the V A
were trying to assert their agency—to make something happen. But they
ended up feeling even more out of control, and many of these once-
confident men were trapped in a cycle between frantic activity and
immobility .
Agency starts with what scientists call interoception, our awareness of
our subtle sensory , body-based feelings: the greater that awareness, the
greater our potential to control our lives. Knowing what  we feel is the first
step to knowing why  we feel that way . If we are aware of the constant
changes in our inner and outer environment ,  we can mobilize to manage
them. But we can’ t do this unless our watchtower , the MPFC, learns to
observe what is going on inside us. This is why mindfulness practice, which
strengthens the MPFC, is a cornerstone of recovery from trauma.12
After I saw the wonderful movie Mar ch of the Penguins , I found
myself thinking about some of my patients. The penguins are stoic and
endearing, and it’ s tragic to learn how , from time immemorial, they have
trudged seventy miles inland from the sea, endured indescribable hardships
to reach their breeding grounds, lost numerous viable eggs to exposure, and
then,  almost starving, dragged themselves back to the ocean. If penguins
had our frontal lobes, they would have used their little flippers to build
igloos, devised a better division of labor , and reor ganized their food
supplies. Many of my patients have survived trauma through tremendouscourage and persistence, only to get into the same kinds of trouble over and
over again. T rauma has shut down their inner compass and robbed them of
the imagination they need to create something better .
The neuroscience of selfhood and agency validates the kinds of somatic
therapies that my friends Peter Levine13 and Pat Ogden14 have developed.
I’ll discuss these and other sensorimotor approaches in more detail in part
V , but in essence their aim is threefold:
to draw out the sensory information that is blocked and frozen
by trauma;
to help patients befriend (rather than suppress) the ener gies
released by that inner experience;
to complete the self-preserving physical actions that were
thwarted when they were trapped, restrained, or immobilized by
terror .
Our gut feelings signal what is safe, life sustaining, or threatening, even
if we cannot quite explain why we feel a particular way . Our sensory
interiority continuously sends us subtle messages about the needs of our
or ganism. Gut feelings also help us to evaluate what is going on around us.
They warn us that the guy who is approaching feels creepy , but they also
convey that a room with western exposure surrounded by daylilies makes us
feel serene. If you have a comfortable connection with  your inner
sensations—if you can trust them to give you accurate information—you
will feel in char ge of your body , your feelings, and your self.
However , traumatized people chronically feel unsafe inside their
bodies: The past is alive in the form of gnawing interior discomfort. Their
bodies are constantly bombarded by visceral warning signs, and, in an
attempt to control these processes, they often become expert at ignoring
their gut feelings and in numbing awareness of what is played out inside.
They learn to hide from their selves.
The more people try to push away and ignore internal warning signs,
the more likely they are to take over and leave them bewildered, confused,
and ashamed. People who cannot comfortably notice what is going oninside become vulnerable to respond to any sensory shift either by shutting
down or by going into a panic—they develop a fear of fear itself.
W e now know that panic symptoms are maintained lar gely because the
individual develops a fear of the bodily sensations associated with panic
attacks. The attack may be triggered by something he or she knows is
irrational, but fear of the sensations keeps them escalating into a full-body
emer gency . “Scared stif f” and “frozen in fear” (collapsing and going numb)
describe precisely what terror and trauma feel like. They are its  visceral
foundation. The experience of fear derives from primitive responses to
threat where escape is thwarted in some way . People’ s lives will be held
hostage to fear until that visceral experience changes.
The price for ignoring or distorting the body’ s messages is being unable
to detect what is truly dangerous or harmful for you and, just as bad, what is
safe or nourishing. Self-regulation depends on having a friendly
relationship with your body . W ithout it you have to rely on external
regulation—from medication, drugs like alcohol, constant reassurance, or
compulsive compliance with the wishes of others.
Many of my patients respond to stress not by noticing and naming it
but by developing migraine headaches or asthma attacks.15 Sandy , a
middle-aged visiting nurse, told me she’d felt terrified and lonely as a child,
unseen by her alcoholic parents. She dealt with this by becoming deferential
to everybody she depended on (including me, her therapist). Whenever her
husband made an insensitive remark, she would come down with an asthma
attack. By the time she noticed that she couldn’ t breathe, it was too late for
an inhaler to be ef fective, and she had to be taken to the emer gency room.
Suppressing  our inner cries for help does not stop our stress hormones
from mobilizing the body . Even though Sandy had learned to ignore her
relationship problems and block out her physical distress signals, they
showed up in symptoms that demanded her attention. Her therapy focused
on identifying the link between her physical sensations and her emotions,
and I also encouraged her to enroll in a kickboxing program. She had no
emer gency room visits during the three years she was my patient.
Somatic symptoms for which no clear physical basis can be found are
ubiquitous in traumatized children and adults. They can include chronic
back and neck pain, fibromyalgia, migraines, digestive problems, spasticcolon/irritable bowel syndrome, chronic fatigue, and some forms of
asthma.16 T raumatized children have fifty times the rate of asthma as their
nontraumatized peers.17 Studies have shown that many children and adults
with fatal asthma attacks were not aware of having breathing problems
before the attacks.
ALEXITHYMIA: NO WORDS FOR FEELINGS
I had a widowed aunt with a painful trauma history who became an
honorary grandmother to our children. She came on frequent visits that
were marked by much doing—making curtains, rearranging kitchen
shelves, sewing children’ s clothes—and very little talking. She was always
eager to please, but it was dif ficult to figure out what she  enjoyed. After
several days of exchanging pleasantries, conversation would come to a halt,
and I’d have to work hard to fill the long silences. On the last day of her
visits I’d drive her to the airport, where she’d give me a stif f good-bye hug
while tears streamed down her face. W ithout a trace of irony she’d then
complain that the cold wind at Logan International Airport made her eyes
water . Her body felt the sadness that her mind couldn’ t register—she was
leaving our young family , her closest living relatives.
Psychiatrists call this phenomenon alexithymia—Greek for not having
words for feelings. Many traumatized children and adults simply cannot
describe what they are feeling because they cannot identify what their
physical sensations mean. They may look furious but deny that they are
angry; they may appear terrified but say that they are fine. Not being able to
discern what is going on inside their bodies causes them to be out of touch
with their needs, and they have trouble taking care of themselves, whether it
involves eating the right amount at the right time or getting the sleep they
need.
Like my aunt, alexithymics substitute the language of action for that of
emotion. When asked, “How would you feel if you saw a truck coming at
you at eighty miles per hour?” most people would say , “I’d be terrified” or
“I’d be frozen with fear .” An alexithymic might reply , “How would I feel? I
don’ t know . . . . I’d get out of the way .”18 They tend to register emotions as
physical problems rather than as signals that something deserves theirattention. Instead of feeling angry or sad, they experience muscle pain,
bowel irregularities, or other symptoms for which no cause can be found.
About three quarters of patients with anorexia nervosa, and more than half
of all patients with bulimia, are bewildered by their emotional feelings and
have great dif ficulty describing them.19 When researchers showed pictures
of angry or distressed faces to people with alexithymia, they could not
figure out what those people were feeling.20
One of the first people who taught me about alexithymia  was the
psychiatrist Henry Krystal, who worked with more than a thousand
Holocaust survivors in his ef fort to understand massive psychic trauma.21
Krystal, himself a concentration camp survivor , found that many of his
patients were professionally successful, but their intimate relationships were
bleak and distant. Suppressing their feelings had made it possible to attend
to the business of the world, but at a price. They learned to shut down their
once overwhelming emotions, and, as a result, they no longer recognized
what they were feeling. Few of them had any interest in therapy .
Paul Frewen at the University of W estern Ontario did a series of brain
scans of people with PTSD who suf fered from alexithymia. One of the
participants told him: “I don’ t know what I feel, it’ s like my head and body
aren’ t connected. I’m living in a tunnel, a fog, no matter what happens it’ s
the same reaction—numbness, nothing. Having a bubble bath and being
burned or raped is the same feeling. My brain doesn’ t feel.” Frewen and his
colleague Ruth Lanius found that the more people were out of touch with
their feelings, the less activity they had in the self-sensing areas of the
brain.22
Because traumatized people often have trouble sensing what is going
on in their bodies, they lack a nuanced response to frustration. They either
react to stress by becoming “spaced out” or with excessive anger . Whatever
their response, they often can’ t tell what is upsetting them. This failure to be
in touch with their bodies contributes to their well-documented lack of self-
protection and high rates of revictimization23 and also to their remarkable
dif ficulties feeling pleasure, sensuality , and having a sense of meaning.
People with alexithymia can get better only by learning to recognize
the relationship between their physical sensations and their emotions, much
as colorblind people can only enter the world of color by learning todistinguish and appreciate shades of gray . Like my aunt and Henry
Krystal’ s patients, they usually are reluctant to do that: Most seem to have
made an unconscious decision that it is better to keep visiting doctors and
treating ailments that don’ t heal than to do the painful work of facing the
demons of the past.
DEPERSONALIZA TION
One step further down on the ladder to self-oblivion is depersonalization—
losing your sense of yourself. Ute’ s brain scan in chapter 4 is, in its very
blankness, a vivid illustration of depersonalization. Depersonalization is
common during traumatic experiences. I was once mugged late at night in a
park close to my home and, floating above the scene, saw myself lying in
the snow with a small head wound, surrounded by three knife-wielding
teenagers. I dissociated the pain of their stab wounds on my hands and did
not feel the slightest fear as I calmly negotiated for the return of my
emptied wallet.
I did not develop PTSD, partly , I think, because I was intensely curious
about having an experience I had studied so closely in others, and partly
because I had the delusion that I would be able make a drawing of my
muggers to show to the police. Of course, they were never caught, but my
fantasy of revenge must have given me a satisfying sense of agency .
T raumatized people are not so fortunate and feel separated from their
bodies. One particularly good description of depersonalization comes from
the German psychoanalyst Paul Schilder , writing in Berlin in 1928:24 “T o
the depersonalized individual the world appears strange, peculiar , foreign,
dream-like. Objects appear at times strangely diminished in size, at times
flat. Sounds appear to come from a distance. . . . The emotions likewise
under go marked alteration. Patients complain that they are capable of
experiencing neither pain nor pleasure. . . . They have become strangers to
themselves.”
I was fascinated to learn that a group of neuroscientists at the
University of Geneva25 had induced similar out-of-body experiences by
delivering mild electric current to a specific spot in the brain, the temporal
parietal junction. In one patient this produced a sensation that she washanging from the ceiling, looking down at her body; in another it induced
an eerie feeling that someone was standing behind her . This research
confirms what our patients tell us: that the self can be detached from the
body and live a phantom existence on its own. Similarly , Lanius and
Frewen, as well as a group of researchers at the University of Groningen in
the Netherlands,26 did brain scans on people who dissociated their terror
and found that the fear centers of the brain simply shut down as they
recalled the event.
BEFRIENDING THE BODY
T rauma victims cannot recover until they become familiar with and
befriend the sensations in their bodies. Being frightened means that you live
in a body that is always on guard. Angry people live in angry bodies. The
bodies of child-abuse victims are tense and defensive until they find a way
to relax and feel safe. In order to change, people need to become aware of
their sensations and the way that their bodies interact with the world around
them. Physical self-awareness is the first step in releasing the tyranny of the
past.
How can people open up to and explore their internal world of
sensations and emotions? In my practice I begin the process by helping my
patients to first notice and then describe the feelings in their bodies—not
emotions such as anger or anxiety or fear but the physical sensations
beneath the emotions: pressure, heat, muscular tension, tingling, caving in,
feeling hollow , and so on. I also work on identifying the sensations
associated with relaxation or pleasure. I help them become aware of their
breath, their gestures and movements. I ask them to pay attention to subtle
shifts in their bodies, such as tightness in their chests or gnawing in their
bellies, when they talk about negative events that they claim did not bother
them.
Noticing sensations for the first time can be quite distressing, and it
may precipitate flashbacks in which people curl up or assume defensive
postures. These are somatic reenactments of the undigested trauma and
most likely represent the postures they assumed when the trauma occurred.
Images and physical sensations may deluge patients at this point, and thetherapist must be familiar with ways to stem torrents of sensation and
emotion to prevent them from becoming retraumatized by accessing the
past. (Schoolteachers, nurses, and police of ficers are often very skilled at
soothing terror reactions because many of them are confronted almost daily
with out-of-control or painfully disor ganized people.)
All too often, however , drugs such as Abilify , Zyprexa, and Seroquel,
are prescribed instead of teaching people the skills to deal with such
distressing physical reactions. Of course, medications only blunt sensations
and do nothing to resolve them or transform them from toxic agents into
allies.
The most natural way for human beings to calm themselves when they
are upset is by clinging to another person. This means that patients who
have been physically or sexually violated face a dilemma: They desperately
crave touch while simultaneously being terrified of body contact. The mind
needs to be reeducated to feel physical sensations, and the body needs to be
helped to tolerate and enjoy the comforts of touch. Individuals who lack
emotional awareness are able, with practice, to connect their physical
sensations to psychological events. Then they can slowly reconnect with
themselves.27
CONNECTING WITH YOURSELF , CONNECTING WITH
OTHERS
I’ll end this chapter with one final study that demonstrates the cost of losing
your body . After Ruth Lanius and her group scanned the idling brain, they
focused on another question from everyday life: What happens in
chronically traumatized people when they make face-to-face contact?
Many patients who come to my of fice are unable to make eye contact. I
immediately know how distressed they are by their dif ficulty meeting my
gaze. It always turns out that they feel disgusting and that they can’ t stand
having me see how despicable they are. It never occurred to me that these
intense feelings of shame would be reflected in abnormal brain activation.
Ruth Lanius once again showed that mind and brain are indistinguishable—
what happens in one is registered in the other .Ruth bought an expensive device that presents a video character to a
person lying in a scanner . (In this case, the cartoon resembled a kindly
Richard Gere.) The figure can approach either head on (looking directly at
the person) or at a forty-five-degree angle with an averted gaze. This made
it possible to compare the ef fects of direct eye contact on brain activation
with those of an averted gaze.28
The most striking dif ference between normal controls and survivors of
chronic trauma was in activation of the prefrontal cortex in response to a
direct eye gaze. The prefrontal cortex (PFC) normally helps us to assess the
person coming toward us, and our mirror neurons help to pick up his
intentions. However , the subjects with PTSD did not activate any part of
their frontal lobe, which means they could not muster any curiosity about
the stranger . They just reacted with intense activation deep inside their
emotional brains, in the primitive areas known as the Periaqueductal Gray ,
which generates startle, hypervigilance, cowering, and other self-protective
behaviors. There was no activation of any part of the brain involved in
social engagement. In response to being looked at they simply went into
survival mode.
What does this mean for their ability to make friends and get along
with others? What does it mean for their therapy? Can people with PTSD
trust a therapist with their deepest fears? T o have genuine relationships you
have to be able to experience others as separate individuals, each with his or
her particular motivations and intentions. While you need to be able to
stand up for yourself, you also need to recognize that other people have
their own agendas. T rauma can make all that hazy and gray .P AR T THREE
THE MINDS OF
CHILDRENTC H A P T E R  7
G E T T I N G  O N  T H E  S A M E
W A V E L E N G T H :  A T T A C H M E N T  A N D
A T T U N E M E N T
The roots of resilience . . . are to be found in the sense of being
understood by and existing in the mind and heart of a loving,
attuned, and self-possessed other .
—Diana Fosha
he Children’ s Clinic at the Massachusetts Mental Health Center was
filled with disturbed and disturbing kids. They were wild creatures who
could not sit still and who hit and bit other children, and sometimes even
the staf f. They would run up to you and cling to you one moment and run
away , terrified, the next. Some masturbated compulsively; others lashed out
at objects, pets, and themselves. They were at once starving for af fection
and angry and defiant. The girls in particular could be painfully compliant.
Whether oppositional or clingy , none of them seemed able to explore or
play in ways typical for children their age. Some of them had hardly
developed a sense of self—they couldn’ t even recognize themselves in a
mirror .
At the time, I knew very little about children, apart from what my two
preschoolers were teaching me. But I was fortunate in my colleague Nina
Fish-Murray , who had studied with Jean Piaget in Geneva, in addition toraising five children of her own. Piaget based his theories of child
development on meticulous, direct observation of children themselves,
starting with his own infants, and Nina brought this spirit to the incipient
T rauma Center at MMHC.
Nina was married to the former chairman of the Harvard psychology
department, Henry Murray , one of the pioneers of personality theory , and
she actively encouraged any junior faculty members who shared her
interests. She was fascinated by my stories about combat veterans because
they reminded her of the troubled kids she worked with in the Boston public
schools. Nina’ s privileged position and personal charm gave us access to
the Children’ s Clinic, which was run by child psychiatrists who had little
interest in trauma.
Henry Murray had, among other things, become famous for designing
the widely used Thematic Apperception T est. The T A T is a so-called
projective test, which uses a set of cards to discover how people’ s inner
reality shapes their view of the world. Unlike the Rorschach cards we used
with the veterans, the T A T cards depict realistic but ambiguous and
somewhat troubling scenes: a man and a woman gloomily staring away
from each other , a boy looking at a broken violin. Subjects are asked to tell
stories about what is going on in the photo, what has happened previously ,
and what happens next. In most cases their interpretations quickly reveal
the themes that preoccupy them.
Nina and I decided to create a set of test cards specifically for children,
based on pictures we cut out of magazines in the clinic waiting room. Our
first study compared twelve six- to eleven-year -olds at the children’ s clinic
with a group of children from a nearby school who matched them as closely
as possible in age, race, intelligence, and family constellation.1 What
dif ferentiated our patients was the abuse they had suf fered within their
families. They included a boy who was severely bruised from repeated
beatings by his mother; a girl whose father had molested her at the age of
four; two boys who had been repeatedly tied to a chair and whipped; and a
girl who, at the age of five, had seen her mother (a prostitute) raped,
dismembered, burned, and put into the trunk of a car . The mother ’ s pimp
was suspected of sexually abusing the girl.The children in our control group also lived in poverty in a depressed
area of Boston where they regularly witnessed shocking violence. While the
study was being conducted , one boy at their school threw gasoline at a
classmate and set him on fire. Another boy was caught in crossfire while
walking to school with his father and a friend. He was wounded in the
groin, and his friend was killed. Given their exposure to such a high
baseline level of violence, would their responses to the cards dif fer from
those of the hospitalized children?
One of our cards depicted a family scene: two smiling kids watching
dad repair a car . Every child who looked at it commented on the danger to
the man lying underneath the vehicle. While the control children told stories
with benign endings—the car would get fixed, and maybe dad and the kids
would drive to McDonald’ s—the traumatized kids came up with gruesome
tales. One girl said that the little girl in the picture was about to smash in
her father ’ s skull with a hammer . A nine-year -old boy who had been
severely physically abused told an elaborate story about how the boy in the
picture kicked away the jack, so that the car mangled his father ’ s body and
his blood spurted all over the garage.
As they told us these stories, our patients got very excited and
disor ganized. W e had to take considerable time out at the water cooler and
going for walks before we could show them the next card. It was little
wonder that almost all of them had been diagnosed with ADHD, and most
were on Ritalin—though the drug certainly didn’ t seem to dampen their
arousal in this situation.
The abused kids gave similar responses to a seemingly innocuous
picture of a pregnant woman silhouetted against a window . When we
showed it to the seven-year -old girl who’d been sexually abused at age four ,
she talked about penises and vaginas and repeatedly asked Nina questions
like “How many people have you humped?” Like several of the other
sexually abused girls in the study , she became so agitated that we had to
stop. A seven-year -old girl from the control group picked up the wistful
mood of the picture: Her story was about a widowed lady sadly looking out
the window , missing her husband. But in the end, the lady found a loving
man to be a good father to her baby .In card after card we saw that, despite their alertness to trouble, the
children who had not been abused still trusted in an essentially benign
universe; they could imagine ways out of bad situations. They seemed to
feel protected and safe within their own families. They also felt loved by at
least one of their parents, which seemed to make a substantial dif ference in
their eagerness to engage in schoolwork and to learn.
The responses of the clinic children were alarming. The most innocent
images stirred up intense feelings of danger , aggression, sexual arousal, and
terror . W e had not selected these photos because they had some hidden
meaning that sensitive people could uncover; they were ordinary images of
everyday life. W e could only conclude that for abused children, the whole
world is filled with triggers. As long as they can imagine only disastrousoutcomes to relatively benign situations, anybody walking into a room, any
stranger , any image, on a screen or on a billboard might be perceived as a
harbinger of catastrophe. In this light the bizarre behavior of the kids at the
children’ s clinic made perfect sense.2
T o my amazement, staf f discussions on the unit rarely mentioned the
horrific real-life experiences of the children and the impact of those traumas
on their feelings, thinking, and self-regulation. Instead, their medical
records were filled with diagnostic labels: “conduct disorder” or
“oppositional defiant disorder” for the angry and rebellious kids; or “bipolar
disorder .” ADHD was a “comorbid” diagnosis for almost all. W as the
underlying trauma being obscured by this blizzard of diagnoses?
Now we faced two big challenges. One was to learn whether the
dif ferent worldview of normal children could account for their resilience
and, on a deeper level, how each child actually creates her map of the
world. The other , equally crucial, question was: Is it possible to help the
minds and brains of brutalized children to redraw their inner maps and
incorporate a sense of trust and confidence in the future?
MEN WITHOUT MOTHERS
The scientific study of the vital relationship between infants and their
mothers was started by upper -class Englishmen who were torn from their
families as young boys to be sent of f to boarding schools, where they were
raised in regimented same-sex settings. The first time I visited the famed
T avistock Clinic in London I noticed a collection of black-and-white
photographs of these great twentieth-century psychiatrists hanging on the
wall going up the main staircase: John Bowlby , W ilfred Bion, Harry
Guntrip, Ronald Fairbairn, and Donald W innicott. Each of them, in his own
way , had explored how our early experiences become prototypes for all our
later connections with others, and how our most intimate sense of self is
created in our minute-to-minute exchanges with our caregivers.
Scientists study what puzzles them most, so that they often become
experts in subjects that others take for granted. (Or , as the attachment
researcher Beatrice Beebe once told me, “most research is me-search.”)
These men who studied the role of mothers in children’ s lives hadthemselves been sent of f to school at a vulnerable age, sometime between
six and ten, long before they should have faced the world alone. Bowlby
himself told me that just such boarding-school experiences probably
inspired Geor ge Orwell’ s novel 1984 , which brilliantly expresses how
human beings may be induced to sacrifice everything they hold dear and
true—including their sense of self—for the sake of being loved and
approved of by someone in a position of authority .
Since Bowlby was close friends with the Murrays, I had a chance to
talk with him about his work whenever he visited Harvard. He was born
into an aristocratic family (his father was sur geon to the King’ s household),
and he trained in psychology , medicine, and psychoanalysis at the temples
of the British establishment. After attending Cambridge University , he
worked with delinquent boys in London’ s East End, a notoriously rough
and crime-ridden neighborhood that was lar gely destroyed during the Blitz.
During and after his service in W orld W ar II, he observed the ef fects of
wartime evacuations and group nurseries that separated young children
from their families. He also studied the ef fect of hospitalization, showing
that even brief separations (parents back then were not allowed to visit
overnight) compounded the children’ s suf fering. By the late 1940s Bowlby
had become persona non grata  in the British psychoanalytic community , as
a result of his radical claim that children’ s disturbed behavior was a
response to actual life experiences—to neglect, brutality , and separation—
rather than the product of infantile sexual fantasies. Undaunted, he devoted
the rest of his life to developing what came to be called attachment theory .3
A SECURE BASE
As we enter this world we scream to announce our presence. Someone
immediately engages with us, bathes us, swaddles us, and fills our
stomachs, and, best of all, our mother may put us on her belly or breast for
delicious skin-to-skin contact. W e are profoundly social creatures; our lives
consist of finding our place within the community of human beings. I love
the expression of the great French psychiatrist Pierre Janet: “Every life is a
piece of art, put together with all means available.”As we grow up, we gradually learn to take care of ourselves, both
physically and emotionally , but we get our first lessons in self-care from the
way that we are cared for . Mastering the skill of self-regulation depends to
a lar ge degree on how harmonious our early interactions with our caregivers
are. Children whose parents are reliable sources of comfort and strength
have a lifetime advantage—a kind of buf fer against the worst that fate can
hand them.
John Bowlby realized that children are captivated by faces and voices
and are exquisitely sensitive to facial expression, posture, tone of voice,
physiological changes, tempo of movement and incipient action. He saw
this inborn capacity as a product of evolution, essential to the survival of
these helpless creatures. Children are also programmed to choose one
particular adult (or at most a few) with whom their natural communication
system develops. This creates a primary attachment bond. The more
responsive the adult is to the child, the deeper the attachment and the more
likely the child will develop healthy ways of responding to the people
around him.
Bowlby would often visit Regent’ s Park in London, where he would
make systematic observations of the interactions between children and their
mothers. While the mothers sat quietly on park benches, knitting or reading
the paper , the kids would wander of f to explore, occasionally looking over
their shoulders to ascertain that Mum was still watching. But when a
neighbor stopped by and absorbed his mother ’ s interest with the latest
gossip, the kids would run back and stay close, making sure he still had her
attention. When infants and young children notice that their mothers are not
fully engaged with them,  they become nervous. When their mothers
disappear from sight, they may cry and become inconsolable, but as soon as
their mothers return, they quiet down and resume their play .
Bowlby saw attachment as the secure base from which a child moves
out into the world. Over the subsequent five decades research has firmly
established that having a safe haven promotes self-reliance and instills a
sense of sympathy and helpfulness to others in distress. From the intimate
give-and-take of the attachment bond children learn that other people have
feelings and thoughts that are both similar to and dif ferent from theirs. In
other words, they get “in sync” with their environment and with the people
around them and develop the self-awareness, empathy , impulse control, andself-motivation that make it possible to become contributing members of
the lar ger social culture. These qualities were painfully missing in the kids
at our Children’ s Clinic.
THE DANCE OF A TTUNEMENT
Children become attached to whoever functions as their primary caregiver .
But the nature of that attachment—whether it is secure or insecure—makes
a huge dif ference over the course of a child’ s life. Secure attachment
develops when caregiving includes emotional attunement. Attunement
starts at the most subtle physical levels of interaction between babies and
their caretakers, and it gives babies the feeling of being met and understood.
As Edinbur gh-based attachment researcher Colwyn T revarthen says: “The
brain coordinates rhythmic body movements and guides them to act in
sympathy with other people’ s brains. Infants hear and learn musicality from
their mother ’ s talk, even before birth.”4
In chapter 4 I described the discovery of mirror neurons, the brain-to-
brain links that give us our capacity for empathy . Mirror neurons start
functioning as soon as babies are born. When researcher Andrew Meltzof f
at the University of Oregon pursed his lips or stuck out his tongue at six-
hour -old babies, they promptly mirrored his actions.5 (Newborns can focus
their eyes only on objects within eight to twelve inches—just enough see
the person who is holding them). Imitation is our most fundamental social
skill. It assures that we automatically pick up and reflect the behavior of our
parents, teachers, and peers.
Most parents relate to their babies so spontaneously that they are barely
aware of how attunement unfolds. But an invitation from a friend, the
attachment researcher Ed T ronick, gave me the chance to observe that
process more closely . Through a one-way mirror at Harvard’ s Laboratory of
Human Development, I watched a mother playing with her two-month-old
son, who was propped in an infant seat facing her .
They were cooing to each other and having a wonderful time—until the
mother leaned in to nuzzle him and the baby , in his excitement, yanked on
her hair . The mother was caught unawares and yelped with pain, pushing
away his hand while her face contorted with anger . The baby let goimmediately , and they pulled back physically from each other . For both of
them the source of delight had become a source of distress. Obviously
frightened, the baby brought his hands up to his face to block out the sight
of his angry mother . The mother , in turn, realizing that her baby was upset,
refocused on him, making soothing sounds in an attempt to smooth things
over . The infant still had his eyes covered, but his craving for connection
soon reemer ged. He started peeking out to see if the coast was clear , while
his mother reached toward him with a concerned expression. As she started
to tickle his belly , he dropped his arms and broke into a happy giggle, and
harmony was reestablished. Infant and mother were attuned again. This
entire sequence of delight, rupture, repair , and new delight took slightly less
than twelve seconds.
T ronick and other researchers have now shown that when infants and
caregivers are in sync on an emotional level, they’re also in sync
physically .6 Babies can’ t regulate their own emotional states, much less the
changes in heart rate, hormone levels, and nervous-system activity that
accompany emotions. When a child is in sync with his caregiver , his sense
of joy and connection is reflected in his steady heartbeat and breathing and
a low level of stress hormones .  His body is calm; so are his emotions. The
moment this music is disrupted—as it often is in the course of a normal day
—all these physiological factors change as well. Y ou can tell equilibrium
has been restored when the physiology calms down.
W e soothe newborns, but parents soon start teaching their children to
tolerate higher levels of arousal, a job that is often assigned to fathers. (I
once heard the psychologist John Gottman say , “Mothers stroke, and fathers
poke.”) Learning how to manage arousal is a key life skill, and parents must
do it for babies before babies can do it for themselves. If that gnawing
sensation in his belly makes a baby cry , the breast or bottle arrives. If he’ s
scared, someone holds and rocks him until he calms down. If his bowels
erupt, someone comes to make him clean and dry . Associating intense
sensations with safety , comfort, and mastery is the foundation of self-
regulation, self-soothing, and self-nurture, a theme to which I return
throughout this book.
A secure attachment combined with the cultivation of competency
builds an internal locus of contr ol, the key factor in healthy copingthroughout life.7 Securely attached children learn what makes them feel
good; they discover what makes them (and others) feel bad, and they
acquire a sense of agency: that their actions can change how they feel and
how others respond. Securely attached kids learn the dif ference between
situations they can control and situations where they need help. They learn
that they can play an active role when faced with dif ficult situations. In
contrast, children with histories of abuse and neglect learn that their terror ,
pleading, and crying do not register with their caregiver . Nothing they can
do or say stops the beating or brings attention and help. In ef fect they’re
being conditioned to give up when they face challenges later in life.
BECOMING REAL
Bowlby’ s contemporary , the pediatrician and psychoanalyst Donald
W innicott, is the father of modern studies of attunement. His minute
observations of mothers and children started with the way mothers hold
their babies. He proposed that these physical interactions lay the
groundwork for a baby’ s sense of self—and, with that, a lifelong sense of
identity . The way a mother holds her child underlies “the ability to feel the
body as the place where the psyche lives.”8 This visceral and kinesthetic
sensation of how our bodies are met lays the foundation for what we
experience as “real.”9
W innicott thought that the vast majority of mothers did just fine in their
attunement to their infants—it does not require extraordinary talent to be
what he called a “good enough mother .”10 But things can go seriously
wrong when mothers are unable to tune in to their baby’ s physical reality . If
a mother cannot meet her baby’ s impulses and needs, “the baby learns to
become the mother ’ s idea of what the baby is.” Having to discount its inner
sensations, and trying to adjust to its caregiver ’ s needs, means the child
perceives that “something is wrong” with the way it is. Children who lack
physical attunement are vulnerable to shutting down the direct feedback
from their bodies, the seat of pleasure, purpose, and direction.
In the years since Bowlby’ s and W innicott’ s ideas were introduced,
attachment research around the world has shown that the vast majority of
children are securely attached. When they grow up, their history of reliable,responsive caregiving will help to keep fear and anxiety at bay . Barring
exposure to some overwhelming life event—trauma—that breaks down the
self-regulatory system, they will maintain a fundamental state of emotional
security throughout their lives. Secure attachment also forms a template for
children’ s relationships. They pick up what others are feeling and early on
learn to tell a game from reality , and they develop a good nose for phony
situations or dangerous people. Securely attached children usually become
pleasant playmates and have lots of self-af firming experiences with their
peers. Having learned to be in tune with other people, they tend to notice
subtle changes in voices and faces and to adjust their behavior accordingly .
They learn to live within a shared understanding of the world and are likely
to become valued members of the community .
This upward spiral can, however , be reversed by abuse or neglect.
Abused kids are often very sensitive to changes in voices and faces, but
they tend to respond to them as threats rather than as cues for staying in
sync. Dr . Seth Pollak of the University of W isconsin showed a series of
faces to a group of normal eight-year -olds and compared their responses
with those of a group of abused children the same age. Looking at this
spectrum of angry to sad expressions, the abused kids were hyperalert to the
slightest features of anger .1 1
COPYRIGHT © 2000, AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSOCIA TION
This is one reason abused children so easily become defensive or
scared. Imagine what it’ s like to make your way through a sea of faces in
the school corridor , trying to figure out who might assault you. Children
who overreact to their peers’ aggression, who don’ t pick up on other kids’
needs, who easily shut down or lose control of their impulses, are likely to
be shunned and left out of sleepovers or play dates. Eventually they may
learn to cover up their fear by putting up a tough front. Or they may spend
more and more time alone, watching TV or playing computer games, falling
even further behind on interpersonal skills and emotional self-regulation.The need for attachment never lessens. Most human beings simply
cannot tolerate being disengaged from others for any length of time. People
who cannot connect through work, friendships, or family usually find other
ways of bonding, as through illnesses, lawsuits, or family feuds. Anything
is preferable to that godforsaken sense of irrelevance and alienation.
A few years ago, on Christmas Eve, I was called to examine a fourteen-
year -old boy at the Suf folk County Jail. Jack had been arrested for breaking
into the house of neighbors who were away on vacation. The bur glar alarm
was howling when the police found him in the living room.
The first question I asked Jack was who he expected would visit him in
jail on Christmas. “Nobody ,” he told me. “Nobody ever pays attention to
me.” It turned out that he had been caught during break-ins numerous times
before. He knew the police, and they knew him. W ith delight in his voice,
he told me that when the cops saw him standing in the middle of the living
room, they yelled, “Oh my God, it’ s Jack again, that little motherfucker .”
Somebody recognized him; somebody knew his name.  A little while later
Jack confessed, “Y ou know , that is what makes it worthwhile.” Kids will go
to almost any length to feel seen and connected.
LIVING WITH THE P ARENTS YOU HA VE
Children have a biological instinct to attach—they have no choice. Whether
their parents or caregivers are loving and caring or distant, insensitive,
rejecting, or abusive, children will develop a coping style based on their
attempt to get at least some of their needs met.
W e now have reliable ways to assess and identify these coping styles,
thanks lar gely to the work of two American scientists, Mary Ainsworth and
Mary Main, and their colleagues, who conducted thousands of hours of
observation of mother -infant pairs over many years. Based on these studies,
Ainsworth created a research tool called the Strange Situation, which looks
at how an infant reacts to temporary separation from the mother . Just as
Bowlby had observed, securely attached infants are distressed when their
mother leaves them, but they show delight when she returns, and after a
brief check-in for reassurance, they settle down and resume their play .But with infants who are insecurely attached, the picture is more
complex. Children whose primary caregiver is unresponsive or rejecting
learn to deal with their anxiety in two distinct ways. The researchers noticed
that some seemed chronically upset and demanding with their mothers,
while others were more passive and withdrawn. In both groups contact with
the mothers failed to settle them down—they did not return to play
contentedly , as happens in secure attachment.
In one pattern, called “avoidant attachment,” the infants look like
nothing really bothers them—they don’ t cry when their mother goes away
and they ignore her when she comes back. However , this does not mean that
they are unaf fected. In fact, their chronically increased heart rates show that
they are in a constant state of hyperarousal. My colleagues and I call this
pattern “dealing but not feeling.”12 Most mothers of avoidant infants seem
to dislike touching their children. They have trouble snuggling and holding
them, and they don’ t use their facial expressions and voices to create
pleasurable back-and-forth rhythms with their babies.
In another pattern, called “anxious” or “ambivalent” attachment, the
infants constantly draw attention to themselves by crying, yelling, clinging,
or screaming: They are “feeling but not dealing.”13 They seem to have
concluded that unless they make a spectacle, nobody is going to pay
attention to them. They become enormously upset when they do not know
where their mother is but derive little comfort from her return. And even
though they don’ t seem to enjoy her company , they stay passively or angrily
focused on her , even in situations when other children would rather play .14
Attachment researchers think that the three “or ganized” attachment
strategies (secure, avoidant, and anxious) work because they elicit the best
care a particular caregiver is capable of providing. Infants who encounter a
consistent pattern of care—even if it’ s marked by emotional distance or
insensitivity—can adapt to maintain the relationship. That does not mean
that there are no problems: Attachment patterns often persist into adulthood.
Anxious toddlers tend to grow into anxious adults, while avoidant toddlers
are likely to become adults who are out of touch with their own feelings and
those of others. (As in, “There’ s nothing wrong with a good spanking. I got
hit and it made me the success I am today .”) In school avoidant children are
likely to bully other kids, while the anxious children are often theirvictims.15 However , development is not linear , and many life experiences
can intervene to change these outcomes.
But there is another group that is less stably adapted, a group that
makes up the bulk of the children we treat and a substantial proportion of
the adults who are seen in psychiatric clinics. Some twenty years ago, Mary
Main and her colleagues at Berkeley began to identify a group of children
(about 15 percent of those they studied) who seemed to be unable to figure
out how to engage with their caregivers. The critical issue turned out to be
that the caregivers themselves were a source of distress or terror to the
children.16
Children in this situation have no one to turn to, and they are faced with
an unsolvable dilemma; their mothers are simultaneously necessary for
survival and a source of fear .17 They “can neither approach (the secure and
ambivalent ‘strategies’), shift [their] attention (the avoidant ‘strategy’), nor
flee.”18 If you observe such children in a nursery school or attachment
laboratory , you see them look toward their parents when they enter the
room and then quickly turn away . Unable to choose between seeking
closeness and avoiding the parent, they may rock on their hands and knees,
appear to go into a trance, freeze with their arms raised, or get up to greet
their parent and then fall to the ground. Not knowing who is safe or whom
they belong to, they may be intensely af fectionate with strangers or may
trust nobody . Main called this pattern “disor ganized attachment.”
Disor ganized attachment is “fright without solution.”19
BECOMING DISORGANIZED WITHIN
Conscientious parents often become alarmed when they discover
attachment research, worrying that their occasional impatience or their
ordinary lapses in attunement may permanently damage their kids. In real
life there are bound to be misunderstandings, inept responses, and failures
of communication. Because mothers and fathers miss cues or are simply
preoccupied with other matters, infants are frequently left to their own
devices to discover how they can calm themselves down. W ithin limits this
is not a problem. Kids need to learn to handle frustrations and
disappointments. W ith “good enough” caregivers, children learn that brokenconnections can be repaired. The critical issue is whether they can
incorporate a feeling of being viscerally safe with their parents or other
caregivers.20
In a study of attachment patterns in over two thousand infants in
“normal” middle-class environments, 62 percent were found to be secure,
15 percent avoidant, 9 percent anxious (also known as ambivalent), and 15
percent disor ganized.21 Interestingly , this lar ge study showed that the
child’ s gender and basic temperament have little ef fect on attachment style;
for example, children with “dif ficult” temperaments are not more likely to
develop a disor ganized style. Kids from lower socioeconomic groups are
more likely to be disor ganized,22 with parents often severely stressed by
economic and family instability .
Children who don’ t feel safe in infancy have trouble regulating their
moods and emotional responses as they grow older . By kinder garten, many
disor ganized infants are either aggressive or spaced out and disengaged, and
they go on to develop a range of psychiatric problems.23 They also show
more physiological stress, as expressed in heart rate, heart rate variability ,24
stress hormone responses, and lowered immune factors.25 Does this kind of
biological dysregulation automatically reset to normal as a child matures or
is moved to a safe environment? So far as we know , it does not.
Parental abuse is not the only cause of disor ganized attachment: Parents
who are preoccupied with their own trauma, such as domestic abuse or rape
or the recent death of a parent or sibling, may also be too emotionally
unstable and inconsistent to of fer much comfort and protection.26 , 27 While
all parents need all the help they can get to help raise secure children,
traumatized parents, in particular , need help to be attuned to their children’ s
needs.
Caregivers often don’ t realize that they are out of tune. I vividly
remember a videotape Beatrice Beebe showed me.28 It featured a young
mother playing with her three-month-old infant. Everything was going well
until the baby pulled back and turned his head away , signaling that he
needed a break. But the mother did not pick up on his cue, and she
intensified her ef forts to engage him by bringing her face closer to his and
increasing the volume of her voice. When he recoiled even more, she kept
bouncing and poking him. Finally he started to scream, at which point themother put him down and walked away , looking crestfallen. She obviously
felt terrible, but she had simply missed the relevant cues. It’ s easy to
imagine how this kind of misattunement, repeated over and over again, can
gradually lead to a chronic disconnection. (Anyone who’ s raised a colicky
or hyperactive baby knows how quickly stress rises when nothing seems to
make a dif ference.) Chronically failing to calm her baby down and establish
an enjoyable face-to-face interaction, the mother is likely to come to
perceive him as a dif ficult child who makes her feel like a failure, and give
up on trying to comfort her child.
In practice it often is dif ficult to distinguish the problems that result
from disor ganized attachment from those that result from trauma: They are
often intertwined. My colleague Rachel Y ehuda studied rates of PTSD in
adult New Y orkers who had been assaulted or raped.29 Those whose
mothers were Holocaust survivors with PTSD had a significantly higher
rate of developing serious psychological problems after these traumatic
experiences. The most reasonable explanation is that their upbringing had
left them with a vulnerable physiology , making it dif ficult for them to
regain their equilibrium after being violated. Y ehuda found a similar
vulnerability in the children of pregnant women who were in the W orld
T rade Center that fatal day in 2001.30
Similarly , the reactions of children to painful events are lar gely
determined by how calm or stressed their parents are.  My former student
Glenn Saxe, now chairman of the Department of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry at NYU, showed that when children were hospitalized for
treatment of severe burns, the development of PTSD could be predicted by
how safe they felt with their mothers.31 The security of their attachment to
their mothers predicted the amount of morphine that was required to control
their pain—the more secure the attachment, the less painkiller was needed.
Another colleague, Claude Chemtob, who directs the Family T rauma
Research Program at NYU Langone Medical Center , studied 1 12 New Y ork
City children who had directly witnessed the terrorist attacks on 9/1 1.32
Children whose mothers were diagnosed with PTSD or depression during
follow-up were six times more likely to have significant emotional
problems and eleven times more likely to be hyperaggressive in response to
their experience. Children whose fathers had PTSD showed behavioralproblems as well, but Chemtob discovered that this ef fect was indirect and
was transmitted via the mother . (Living with an irascible, withdrawn, or
terrified spouse is likely to impose a major psychological burden on the
partner , including depression.)
If you have no internal sense of security , it is dif ficult to distinguish
between safety and danger . If you feel chronically numbed out, potentially
dangerous situations may make you feel alive. If you conclude that you
must be a terrible person (because why else would your parents have you
treated that way?), you start expecting other people to treat you horribly .
Y ou probably deserve it, and anyway , there is nothing you can do about it.
When disor ganized people carry self-perceptions like these, they are set up
to be traumatized by subsequent experiences.33
THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF DISORGANIZED
A TT ACHMENT
In the early 1980s my colleague Karlen L yons-Ruth, a Harvard attachment
researcher , began to videotape face-to-face interactions between mothers
and their infants at six months, twelve months and eighteen months. She
taped them again when the children were five years old and once more
when they were seven or eight.34 All were from high-risk families: 100
percent met federal poverty guidelines, and almost half the mothers were
single parents.
Disor ganized attachment showed up in two dif ferent ways: One group
of mothers seemed to be too preoccupied with their own issues to attend to
their infants. They were often intrusive and hostile; they alternated between
rejecting their infants and acting as if they expected them to respond to their
needs. Another group of mothers seemed helpless and fearful. They often
came across as sweet or fragile, but they didn’ t know how to be the adult in
the relationship and seemed to want their children to comfort them . They
failed to greet their children after having been away and did not pick them
up when the children were distressed. The mothers didn’ t seem to be doing
these things deliberately—they simply didn’ t know how to be attuned to
their kids and respond to their cues and thus failed to comfort and reassure
them. The hostile/intrusive mothers were more likely to have childhoodhistories of physical abuse and/or of witnessing domestic violence, while
the withdrawn/dependent mothers were more likely to have histories of
sexual abuse or parental loss (but not physical abuse).35
I have always wondered how parents come to abuse their kids. After
all, raising healthy of fspring is at the very core of our human sense of
purpose and meaning. What could drive parents to deliberately hurt or
neglect their children? Karlen’ s research provided me with one answer:
W atching her videos, I could see the children becoming more and more
inconsolable, sullen, or resistant to their misattuned mothers. At the same
time, the mothers became increasingly frustrated, defeated, and helpless in
their interactions. Once the mother comes to see the child not as her partner
in an attuned relationship but as a frustrating, enraging, disconnected
stranger , the stage is set for subsequent abuse.
About eighteen years later , when these kids were around twenty years
old, L yons-Ruth did a follow-up study to see how they were coping. Infants
with seriously disrupted emotional communication patterns with their
mothers at eighteen months grew up to become young adults with an
unstable sense of self, self-damaging impulsivity (including excessive
spending, promiscuous sex, substance abuse, reckless driving, and binge
eating), inappropriate and intense anger , and recurrent suicidal behavior .
Karlen and her colleagues had expected that hostile/intrusive behavior
on the part of the mothers would be the most powerful predictor of mental
instability in their adult children, but they discovered otherwise. Emotional
withdrawal had the most profound and long-lasting impact. Emotional
distance and role reversal (in which mothers expected the kids to look after
them) were specifically linked to aggressive behavior against self and
others in the young adults.
DISSOCIA TION: KNOWING AND NOT KNOWING
L yons-Ruth was particularly interested in the phenomenon of dissociation,
which is manifested in feeling lost, overwhelmed, abandoned, and
disconnected from the world and in seeing oneself as unloved, empty ,
helpless, trapped, and weighed down. She found a “striking and
unexpected” relationship between maternal disengagement andmisattunement during the first two years of life and dissociative symptoms
in early adulthood. L yons-Ruth concludes that infants who are not truly
seen and known by their mothers are at high risk to grow into adolescents
who are unable to know and to see.”36
Infants who live in secure relationships learn to communicate not only
their frustrations and distress but also their emer ging selves—their interests,
preferences, and goals. Receiving a sympathetic response cushions infants
(and adults) against extreme levels of frightened arousal. But if your
caregivers ignore your needs, or resent your very existence, you learn to
anticipate rejection and withdrawal. Y ou cope as well as you can by
blocking out your mother ’ s hostility or neglect and act as if it doesn’ t
matter , but your body is likely to remain in a state of high alert, prepared to
ward of f blows, deprivation, or abandonment. Dissociation means
simultaneously knowing and not knowing.37
Bowlby wrote: “What cannot be communicated to the [m]other cannot
be communicated to the self.”38 If you cannot tolerate what you know or
feel what you feel, the only option is denial and dissociation.39 Maybe the
most devastating long-term ef fect of this shutdown is not feeling real inside,
a condition we saw in the kids in the Children’ s Clinic and that we see in
the children and adults who come to the T rauma Center . When you don’ t
feel real nothing matters, which makes it impossible to protect yourself
from danger . Or you may resort to extremes in an ef fort to feel something —
even cutting yourself with a razor blade or getting into fistfights with
strangers.
Karlen’ s research showed that dissociation is learned early: Later abuse
or other traumas did not account for dissociative symptoms in young
adults.40 Abuse and trauma accounted for many other problems, but not for
chronic dissociation or aggression against self. The critical underlying issue
was that these patients didn’ t know how to feel safe. Lack of safety within
the early caregiving relationship led to an impaired sense of inner reality ,
excessive clinging, and self-damaging behavior: Poverty , single parenthood,
or maternal psychiatric symptoms did not predict these symptoms.
This does not imply that child abuse is irrelevant41, but that the quality
of early caregiving is critically important in preventing mental health
problems, independent of other traumas.42 For that reason treatment needsto address not only the imprints of specific traumatic events but also the
consequences of not having been mirrored, attuned to, and given consistent
care and af fection: dissociation and loss of self-regulation.
REST ORING SYNCHRONY
Early attachment patterns create the inner maps that chart our relationships
throughout life, not only in terms of what we expect from others, but also in
terms of how much comfort and pleasure we can experience in their
presence. I doubt that the poet e. e. cummings could have written his joyous
lines “i like my body when it is with your body . . . . muscles better and
nerves more” if his earliest experiences had been frozen faces and hostile
glances.43 Our relationship maps are implicit, etched into the emotional
brain and not reversible simply by understanding how they were created.
Y ou may realize that your fear of intimacy has something to do with your
mother ’ s postpartum depression or with the fact that she herself was
molested as a child, but that alone is unlikely to open you to happy , trusting
engagement with others.
However , that realization may help you to start exploring other ways to
connect in relationships—both for your own sake and in order to not pass
on an insecure attachment to your own children. In part 5 I’ll discuss a
number of approaches to healing damaged attunement systems through
training in rhythmicity and reciprocity .44 Being in synch with oneself and
with others requires the integration of our body-based senses—vision,
hearing, touch, and balance. If this did not happen in infancy and early
childhood, there is an increased chance of later sensory integration
problems (to which trauma and neglect are by no means the only pathways).
Being in synch means resonating through sounds and movements that
connect, which are embedded in the daily sensory rhythms of cooking and
cleaning, going to bed and waking up. Being in synch may mean sharing
funny faces and hugs, expressing delight or disapproval at the right
moments, tossing balls back and forth, or singing together . At the T rauma
Center , we have developed programs to coach parents in connection and
attunement, and my patients have told me about many other ways to get
themselves in synch, ranging from choral singing and ballroom dancing tojoining basketball teams, jazz bands and chamber music groups. All of
these foster a sense of attunement and communal pleasure.MC H A P T E R  8
T R A P P E D  I N  R E L A T I O N S H I P S :  T H E
C O S T  O F  A B U S E  A N D  N E G L E C T
The “night sea journey” is the journey into the parts of ourselves
that are split of f, disavowed, unknown, unwanted, cast out, and
exiled to the various subterranean worlds of consciousness. . . .
The goal of this journey is to reunite us with ourselves. Such a
homecoming can be surprisingly painful, even brutal. In order to
undertake it, we must first agree to exile nothing .
—Stephen Cope
arilyn was a tall, athletic-looking woman in her midthirties who
worked as an operating-room nurse in a nearby town. She told me
that a few months earlier she’d started to play tennis at her sports club with
a Boston fireman named Michael. She usually steered clear of men, she
said, but she had gradually become comfortable enough with Michael to
accept his invitations to go out for pizza after their matches. They’d talk
about tennis, movies, their nephews and nieces—nothing too personal.
Michael clearly enjoyed her company , but she told herself he didn’ t really
know her .
One Saturday evening in August, after tennis and pizza, she invited him
to stay over at her apartment. She described feeling “uptight and unreal” as
soon as they were alone together . She remembered asking him to go slow
but had very little sense of what had happened after that. After a few glassesof wine and a rerun of Law & Or der , they apparently fell asleep together on
top of her bed. At around two in the morning, Michael turned over in his
sleep. When Marilyn felt his body touch hers, she exploded—pounding him
with her fists, scratching and biting, screaming, “Y ou bastard, you bastard!”
Michael, startled awake, grabbed his belongings and fled. After he left,
Marilyn sat on her bed for hours, stunned by what had happened. She felt
deeply humiliated and hated herself for what she had done, and now she’d
come to me for help in dealing with her terror of men and her inexplicable
rage attacks.
My work with veterans had prepared me to listen to painful stories like
Marilyn’ s without trying to jump in immediately to fix the problem.
Therapy often starts with some inexplicable behavior: attacking a boyfriend
in the middle of the night, feeling terrified when somebody looks you in the
eye, finding yourself covered with blood after cutting yourself with a piece
of glass, or deliberately vomiting up every meal. It takes time and patience
to allow the reality behind such symptoms to reveal itself.
TERROR AND NUMBNESS
As we talked, Marilyn told me that Michael was the first man she’d taken
home in more than five years, but this was not the first time she’d lost
control when a man spent the night with her . She repeated that she always
felt uptight and spaced out when she was alone with a man, and there had
been other times when she’d “come to” in her apartment, cowering in a
corner , unable to remember clearly what had happened.
Marilyn also said she felt as if she was just “going through the
motions” of having a life. Except for when she was at the club playing
tennis or at work in the operating room, she usually felt numb. A few years
earlier she’d found that she could relieve her numbness by scratching
herself with a razor blade, but she had become frightened when she found
that she was cutting herself more and more deeply , and more and more
often, to get relief. She had tried alcohol, too, but that reminded her of her
dad and his out-of-control drinking, which made her feel disgusted with
herself. So, instead, she played tennis fanatically , whenever she could. That
made her feel alive.When I asked her about her past, Marilyn said she guessed that she
“must have had” a happy childhood, but she could remember very little
from before age twelve. She told me she’d been a timid adolescent, until
she had a violent confrontation with her alcoholic father when she was
sixteen and ran away from home. She worked her way through community
college and went on to get a degree in nursing without any help from her
parents. She felt ashamed that during this time she’d slept around, which
she described as “looking for love in all the wrong places.”
As I often did with new patients, I asked her to draw a family portrait,
and when I saw her drawing (reproduced above), I decided to go slowly .
Clearly Marilyn was harboring some terrible memories, but she could not
allow herself to recognize what her own picture revealed. She had drawn a
wild and terrified child, trapped in some kind of cage and threatened not
only by three nightmarish figures—one with no eyes—but also by a huge
erect penis protruding into her space. And yet this woman said she “must
have had” a happy childhood.
As the poet W . H. Auden wrote:T ruth, like love and sleep, r esents
Appr oaches that ar e too intense.1
I call this Auden’ s rule, and in keeping with it I deliberately did not
push Marilyn to tell me what she remembered. In fact, I’ve learned that it’ s
not important for me to know every detail of a patient’ s trauma. What is
critical is that the patients themselves learn to tolerate feeling what they feel
and knowing what they know . This may take weeks or even years. I decided
to start Marilyn’ s treatment by inviting her to join an established therapy
group where she could find support and acceptance before facing the engine
of her distrust, shame, and rage.
As I expected, Marilyn arrived at the first group meeting looking
terrified, much like the girl in her family portrait; she was withdrawn and
did not reach out to anybody . I’d chosen this group for her because its
members had always been helpful and accepting of new members who were
too scared to talk. They knew from their own experience that unlocking
secrets is a gradual process. But this time they surprised me, asking so
many intrusive questions about Marilyn’ s love life that I recalled her
drawing of the little girl under assault. It was almost as though Marilyn had
unwittingly enlisted the group to repeat her traumatic past. I intervened to
help her set some boundaries about what she’d talk about, and she began to
settle in.
Three months later Marilyn told the group that she had stumbled and
fallen a few times on the sidewalk between the subway and my of fice. She
worried that her eyesight was beginning to fail: She’d also been missing a
lot of tennis balls recently . I thought again about her drawing and the wild
child with the huge, terrified eyes. W as this some sort of “conversion
reaction,” in which patients express their conflicts by losing function in
some part of their body? Many soldiers in both world wars had suf fered
paralysis that couldn’ t be traced to physical injuries, and I had seen cases of
“hysterical blindness” in Mexico and India
Still, as a physician, I wasn’ t about to conclude without further
assessment that this was “all in her head.” I referred her to colleagues at the
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary and asked them to do a very thorough
workup. Several weeks later the tests came back. Marilyn had lupuserythematosus of her retina, an autoimmune disease that was eroding her
vision, and she would need immediate treatment. I was appalled: Marilyn
was the third person that year whom I’d suspected of having an incest
history and who was then diagnosed with an autoimmune disease—a
disease in which the body starts attacking itself.
After making sure that Marilyn was getting the proper medical care, I
consulted with two of my colleagues at Massachusetts General, psychiatrist
Scott W ilson and Richard Kradin, who ran the immunology laboratory
there. I told them Marilyn’ s story , showed them the picture she’d drawn,
and asked them to collaborate on a study . They generously volunteered their
time and the considerable expense of a full immunology workup. W e
recruited twelve women with incest histories who were not taking any
medications, plus twelve women who had never been traumatized and who
also did not take meds—a surprisingly dif ficult control group to find.
(Marilyn was not in the study; we generally do not ask our clinical patients
to be part of our research ef forts.)
When the study was completed and the data analyzed, Rich reported
that the group of incest survivors had abnormalities in their CD45 RA-to-
RO ratio, compared with their nontraumatized peers. CD45 cells are the
“memory cells” of the immune system. Some of them, called RA cells, have
been activated by past exposure to toxins; they quickly respond to
environmental threats they have encountered before. The RO cells, in
contrast, are kept in reserve for new challenges; they are turned on to deal
with threats the body has not met previously . The RA-to-RO ratio is the
balance between cells that recognize known toxins and cells that wait for
new information to activate. In patients with histories of incest, the
proportion of RA cells that are ready to pounce is lar ger than normal. This
makes the immune system oversensitive to threat, so that it is prone to
mount a defense when none is needed, even when this means attacking the
body’ s own cells.
Our study showed that, on a deep level, the bodies of incest victims
have trouble distinguishing between danger and safety . This means that the
imprint of past trauma does not consist only of distorted perceptions of
information coming from the outside; the or ganism itself also has a problem
knowing how to feel safe. The past is impressed not only on their minds,
and in misinterpretations of innocuous events (as when Marilyn attackedMichael because he accidentally touched her in her sleep), but also on the
very core of their beings: in the safety of their bodies.2
A T ORN MAP OF THE WORLD
How do people learn what is safe and what is not safe, what is inside and
what is outside, what should be resisted and what can safely be taken in?
The best way we can understand the impact of child abuse and neglect is to
listen to what people like Marilyn can teach us. One of the things that
became clear as I came to know her better was that she had her own unique
view of how the world functions.
As children, we start of f at the center of our own universe, where we
interpret everything that happens from an egocentric vantage point. If our
parents or grandparents keep telling us we’re the cutest, most delicious
thing in the world, we don’ t question their judgment—we must be exactly
that. And deep down, no matter what else we learn about ourselves, we will
carry that sense with us: that we are basically adorable. As a result, if we
later hook up with somebody who treats us badly , we will be outraged. It
won’ t feel right: It’ s not familiar; it’ s not like home. But if we are abused or
ignored in childhood, or grow up in a family where sexuality is treated with
disgust, our inner map contains a dif ferent message. Our sense of our self is
marked by contempt and humiliation, and we are more likely to think “he
(or she) has my number” and fail to protest if we are mistreated.
Marilyn’ s past shaped her view of every relationship. She was
convinced that men didn’ t give a damn about other people’ s feelings and
that they got away with whatever they wanted. W omen couldn’ t be trusted
either . They were too weak to stand up for themselves, and they’d sell their
bodies to get men to take care of them. If you were in trouble, they
wouldn’ t lift a finger to help you.  This worldview manifested itself in the
way Marilyn approached her colleagues at work: She was suspicious of the
motives of anyone who was kind to her and called them on the slightest
deviation from the nursing regulations. As for herself: She was a bad seed, a
fundamentally toxic person who made bad things happen to those around
her .When I first encountered patients like Marilyn, I used to challenge their
thinking and try to help them see the world in a more positive, flexible way .
One day a woman named Kathy set me straight. A group member had
arrived late to a session because her car had broken down, and Kathy
immediately blamed herself: “I saw how rickety your car was last week; I
knew I should have of fered you a ride.” Her self-criticism escalated to the
point that, only a few minutes later , she was taking responsibility for her
sexual abuse: “I brought it on myself: I was seven years old and I loved my
daddy . I wanted him to love me, and I did what he wanted me to do. It was
my own fault.” When I intervened to reassure her , saying, “Come on, you
were just a little girl—it was your father ’ s responsibility to maintain the
boundaries,” Kathy turned toward me. “Y ou know , Bessel,” she said, “I
know how important it is for you to be a good therapist, so when you make
stupid comments like that, I usually thank you profusely . After all, I am an
incest survivor—I was trained to take care of the needs of grown-up,
insecure men. But after two years I trust you enough to tell you that those
comments make me feel terrible. Y es, it’ s true; I instinctively blame myself
for everything bad that happens to the people around me. I know that isn’ t
rational, and I feel really dumb for feeling this way , but I do. When you try
to talk me into being more reasonable I only feel even more lonely and
isolated—and it confirms the feeling that nobody in the whole world will
ever understand what it feels like to be me.”
I genuinely thanked her for her feedback, and I’ve tried ever since not
to tell my patients that they should not feel the way they do. Kathy taught
me that my responsibility goes much deeper: I have to help them
reconstruct their inner map of the world.
As I discussed in the previous chapter , attachment researchers have
shown that our earliest caregivers don’ t only feed us, dress us, and comfort
us when we are upset; they shape the way our rapidly growing brain
perceives reality . Our interactions with our caregivers convey what is safe
and what is dangerous: whom we can count on and who will let us down;
what we need to do to get our needs met. This information is embodied in
the warp and woof of our brain circuitry and forms the template of how we
think of ourselves and the world around us. These inner maps are
remarkably stable across time.This doesn’ t mean, however , that our maps can’ t be modified by
experience. A deep love relationship, particularly during adolescence, when
the brain once again goes through a period of exponential change, truly can
transform us. So can the birth of a child, as our babies often teach us how to
love. Adults who were abused or neglected as children can still learn the
beauty of intimacy and mutual trust or have a deep spiritual experience that
opens them to a lar ger universe. In contrast, previously uncontaminated
childhood maps can become so distorted by an adult rape or assault that all
roads are rerouted into terror or despair . These responses are not reasonable
and therefore cannot be changed simply by reframing irrational beliefs. Our
maps of the world are encoded in the emotional brain, and changing them
means having to reor ganize that part of the central nervous system, the
subject of the treatment section of this book.
Nonetheless, learning to recognize irrational thoughts and behavior can
be a useful first step. People like Marilyn often discover that their
assumptions are not the same as those of their friends. If they are lucky ,
their friends and colleagues will tell them in words, rather than in actions,
that their distrust and self-hatred makes collaboration dif ficult. But that
rarely happens, and Marilyn’ s experience was typical: After she assaulted
Michael, he had absolutely no interest in working things out, and she lost
both his friendship and her favorite tennis partner . It is at this point that
smart and courageous people like Marilyn, who maintain their curiosity and
determination in the face of repeated defeats, start looking for help.
Generally the rational brain can override the emotional brain, as long as
our fears don’ t hijack us. (For example, your fear at being flagged down by
the police can turn instantly to gratitude when the cop warns you that
there’ s an accident ahead.) But the moment we feel trapped, enraged, or
rejected, we are vulnerable to activating old maps and to follow their
directions. Change begins when we learn to “own” our emotional brains.
That means learning to observe and tolerate the heartbreaking and gut-
wrenching  sensations that register misery and humiliation. Only after
learning to bear what is going on inside can we start to befriend, rather than
obliterate, the emotions that keep our maps fixed and immutable.
LEARNING T O REMEMBERAbout a year into Marilyn’ s group, another member , Mary , asked
permission to talk about what had happened to her when she was thirteen
years old. Mary worked as a prison guard, and she was involved in a
sadomasochistic relationship with another woman. She wanted the group to
know her background in the hope that they would become more tolerant of
her extreme reactions, such as her tendency to shut down or blow up in
response to the slightest provocation.
Struggling to get the words out, Mary told us that one evening, when
she was thirteen years old, she was raped by her older brother and a gang of
his friends. The rape resulted in pregnancy , and her mother gave her an
abortion at home, on the kitchen table. The group sensitively tuned in to
what Mary was sharing and comforted her through her sobbing. I was
profoundly moved by their empathy—they were consoling Mary in a way
that they must have wished somebody had comforted them when they first
confronted their traumas.
When time ran out, Marilyn asked if she could take a few more minutes
to talk about what she had experienced during the session. The group
agreed, and she told us: “Hearing that story , I wonder if I may have been
sexually abused myself.” My mouth must have dropped open. Based on her
family drawing, I had always assumed that she was aware, at least on some
level, that this was the case. She had reacted like an incest victim in her
response to Michael, and she chronically behaved as if the world were a
terrifying place.
Y et even though she’d drawn a girl who was being sexually molested,
she—or at least her cognitive, verbal self—had no idea what had actually
happened to her . Her immune system, her muscles, and her fear system all
had kept the score, but her conscious mind lacked a story that could
communicate the experience. She reenacted her trauma in her life, but she
had no narrative to refer to. As we will see in chapter 12, traumatic memory
dif fers in complex ways from normal recall, and it involves many layers of
mind and brain.
T riggered by Mary’ s story , and spurred on by the nightmares that
followed, Marilyn began individual therapy with me in which she started to
deal with her past. At first she experienced waves of intense, free-floating
terror . She tried stopping for several weeks, but when she found she could
no longer sleep and had to take time of f from work, she continued oursessions. As she told me later: “My only criterion for whether a situation is
harmful is feeling, ‘This is going to kill me if I don’ t get out.’”
I began to teach Marilyn calming techniques, such as focusing on
breathing deeply—in and out, in and out, at six breaths a minute—while
following the sensations of the breath in her body . This was combined with
tapping acupressure points, which helped her not to become overwhelmed.
W e also worked on mindfulness: Learning to keep her mind alive while
allowing her body to feel the feelings that she had come to dread slowly
enabled Marilyn to stand back and observe her experience, rather than
being immediately hijacked by her feelings. She had tried to dampen or
abolish those feelings with alcohol and exercise, but now she began to feel
safe enough to begin to remember what had happened to her as a girl. As
she gained ownership over her physical sensations, she also began to be
able to tell the dif ference between past and present: Now if she felt
someone’ s leg brush against her in the night, she might be able to recognize
it as Michael’ s leg, the leg of the handsome tennis partner she’d invited to
her apartment. That leg did not belong to anyone else, and its touch didn’ t
mean someone was trying to molest her . Being still enabled her to know—
fully , physically know—that she was a thirty-four -year -old woman and not
a little girl.
When Marilyn finally began to access her memories, they emer ged as
flashbacks of the wallpaper in her childhood bedroom. She realized that this
was what she had focused on when her father raped her when she was eight
years old. His molestation had scared her beyond her capacity to endure, so
she had needed to push it out of her memory bank. After all, she had to
keep living with this man, her father , who had assaulted her . Marilyn
remembered having turned to her mother for protection, but when she ran to
her and tried to hide herself by burying her face in her mother ’ s skirt, she
was met with only a limp embrace. At times her mother remained silent; at
others she cried or angrily scolded Marilyn for “making Daddy so angry .”
The terrified child found no one to protect her , to of fer strength or shelter .
As Roland Summit wrote in his classic study The Child Sexual Abuse
Accommodation Syndr ome : “Initiation, intimidation, stigmatization,
isolation, helplessness and self-blame depend on a terrifying reality of child
sexual abuse. Any attempts by the child to divulge the secret will be
countered by an adult conspiracy of silence and disbelief. ‘Don’ t worryabout things like that; that could never happen in our family .’ ‘How could
you ever think of such a terrible thing?’ ‘Don’ t let me ever hear you say
anything like that again!’ The average child never asks and never tells.”3
After forty years of doing this work I still regularly hear myself saying,
“That’ s unbelievable,” when patients tell me about their childhoods. They
often are as incredulous as I am—how could parents inflict such torture and
terror on their own child? Part of them continues to insist that they must
have made the experience up or that they are exaggerating. All of them are
ashamed about what happened to them, and they blame themselves—on
some level they firmly believe that these terrible things were done to them
because they are terrible people.
Marilyn now began to explore how the powerless child had learned to
shut down and comply with whatever was asked of her . She had done so by
making herself disappear: The moment she heard her father ’ s footsteps in
the corridor outside her bedroom, she would “put her head in the clouds.”
Another patient of mine who had a similar experience made a drawing that
depicts how that process works. When her father started to touch her , she
made herself disappear; she floated up to the ceiling, looking down on some
other little girl in the bed.4 She was glad that it was not really her—it was
some other girl who was being molested.Looking at these heads separated from their bodies by an impenetrable
fog really opened my eyes to the experience of dissociation, which is so
common among incest victims. Marilyn herself later realized that, as an
adult, she had continued to float up to the ceiling when she found herself in
a sexual situation. In the period when she’d been more sexually active, a
partner would occasionally tell her how amazing she’d been in bed—that
he’d barely recognized her , that she’d even talked dif ferently . Usually she
did not remember what had happened, but at other times she’d become
angry and aggressive. She had no sense of who she really was sexually , so
she gradually withdrew from dating altogether—until Michael.
HA TING YOUR HOME
Children have no choice who their parents are, nor can they understand that
parents may simply be too depressed, enraged, or spaced out to be there for
them or that their parents’ behavior may have little to do with them.
Children have no choice but to or ganize themselves to survive within the
families they have. Unlike adults, they have no other authorities to turn tofor help—their parents ar e  the authorities. They cannot rent an apartment or
move in with someone else: Their very survival hinges on their caregivers.
Children sense—even if it they are not explicitly threatened—that if
they talked about their beatings or molestation to teachers they would be
punished. Instead, they focus their ener gy on not  thinking about what has
happened and not feeling the residues of terror and panic in their bodies.
Because they cannot tolerate knowing what they have experienced, they
also cannot understand that their anger , terror , or collapse has anything to
do with that experience. They don’ t talk; they act and deal with their
feelings by being enraged, shut down, compliant, or defiant.
Children are also programmed to be fundamentally loyal to their
caretakers, even if they are abused by them. T error increases the need for
attachment, even if the source of comfort is also the source of terror . I have
never met a child below the age of ten who was tortured at home (and who
had broken bones and burned skin to show for it) who, if given the option,
would not have chosen to stay with his or her family rather than being
placed in a foster home. Of course, clinging to one’ s abuser is not exclusive
to childhood. Hostages have put up bail for their captors, expressed a wish
to marry them, or had sexual relations with them; victims of domestic
violence often cover up for their abusers. Judges often tell me how
humiliated they feel when they try to protect victims of domestic violence
by issuing restraining orders, only to find out that many of them secretly
allow their partners to return.
It took Marilyn a long time before she was ready to talk about her
abuse: She was not ready to violate her loyalty to her family—deep inside
she felt that she still needed them to protect her against her fears. The price
of this loyalty is unbearable feelings of loneliness, despair , and the
inevitable rage of helplessness. Rage that has nowhere to go is redirected
against the self, in the form of depression, self-hatred, and self-destructive
actions. One of my patients told me, “It is like hating your home, your
kitchen and pots and pans, your bed, your chairs, your table, your rugs.”
Nothing feels safe—least of all your own body .
Learning to trust is a major challenge. One of my other patients, a
schoolteacher whose grandfather raped her repeatedly before she was six,
sent me the following e-mail: “I started mulling the danger of opening up
with you in traf fic  on the way home after our therapy appointment, andthen, as I mer ged into Route 124, I realized that I had broken the rule of not
getting attached, to you and to my students.”
During our next meeting she told me she had also been raped by her lab
instructor in college. I asked her whether she had sought help and made a
complaint against him. “I couldn’ t make myself cross the road to the
clinic,” she replied. “I was desperate for help, but as I stood there, I felt
very deeply that I would only be hurt even more. And that might well have
been true. Of course, I had to hide what had happened from my parents—
and from everyone else.”
After I told her that I was concerned about what was going on with her ,
she wrote me another e-mail: “I’m trying to remind myself that I didn’ t do
anything to deserve such treatment. I don’ t think I have ever had anyone
look at me like that and say they were worried about me, and I am holding
on to it like a treasure: the idea that I am worth being worried about by
someone I respect and who does understand how deeply I am struggling
now .”
In order to know who we are—to have an identity—we must know (or
at least feel that we know) what is and what was “real.” W e must observe
what we see around us and label it correctly; we must also be able trust our
memories and be able to tell them apart from our imagination. Losing the
ability to make these distinctions is one sign of what psychoanalyst W illiam
Niederland called “soul murder .” Erasing awareness and cultivating denial
are often essential to survival, but the price is that you lose track of who
you are, of what you are feeling, and of what and whom you can trust.5
REPLA YING THE TRAUMA
One memory of Marilyn’ s childhood trauma came to her in a dream in
which she felt as if she were being choked and was unable to breathe. A
white tea towel was wrapped around her hands, and then she was lifted up
with the towel around her neck, so that she could not touch the ground with
her feet. She woke in a panic, thinking that she was surely going to die. Her
dream reminded me of the nightmares war veterans had reported to me:
seeing the precise, unadulterated images of faces and body parts they had
encountered in battle. These dreams were so terrifying that they tried to notfall asleep at night; only daytime napping, which was not associated with
nocturnal ambushes, felt halfway safe.
During this stage of therapy Marilyn was repeatedly flooded with
images and sensations related to the choking dream. She remembered
sitting in the kitchen as a four -year -old with swollen eyes, a sore neck, and
a bloody nose, while her father and brother laughed at her and called her a
stupid, stupid girl. One day Marilyn reported, “As I was brushing my teeth
last evening, I was overcome with feelings of thrashing around. I was like a
fish out of water , violently turning my body as I fought against the lack of
air . I sobbed and choked as I brushed my teeth. Panic was rising up out of
my chest with the feeling of thrashing. I had to use every bit of strength I
had not to scream, ‘NONONONONONO,’ as I stood over the sink.” She
went to bed and fell asleep but woke up like clockwork every two hours
during the rest of the night.
T rauma is not stored as a narrative with an orderly beginning, middle,
and end. As I’ll discuss in detail in chapters 1 1 and 12, memories initially
return as they did for Marilyn: as flashbacks that contain fragments of the
experience, isolated images, sounds, and body sensations that initially have
no context other than fear and panic. When Marilyn was a child, she had no
way of giving voice to the unspeakable, and it would have made no
dif ference anyway—nobody was listening.
Like so many survivors of  childhood abuse, Marilyn exemplified the
power of the life force, the will to live and to own one’ s life, the ener gy that
counteracts the annihilation of trauma. I gradually came to realize that the
only thing that makes it possible to do the work of healing trauma is awe at
the dedication to survival that enabled my patients to endure their abuse and
then to endure the dark nights of the soul that inevitably occur on the road
to recovery .HC H A P T E R  9
W H A T ’ S  L O V E  G O T  T O  D O  W I T H  I T ?
Initiation, intimidation, stigmatization, isolation, helplessness and
self-blame depend on a terrifying reality of child sexual abuse. . . .
“Don’ t worry about things like that; that could never happen in our
family .” “How could you ever think of such a terrible thing?”
“Don’ t let me ever hear you say anything like that again!” The
average child never asks and never tells.
—Roland Summit The Child Sexual Abuse Accommodation Syndrome
ow do we or ganize our thinking with regard to individuals like
Marilyn, Mary , and Kathy , and what can we do to help them? The way
we define their problems, our diagnosis, will determine how we approach
their care. Such patients typically receive five or six dif ferent unrelated
diagnoses in the course of their psychiatric treatment. If their doctors focus
on their mood swings, they will be identified as bipolar and prescribed
lithium or valproate.  If the professionals are most impressed with their
despair , they will be told they are suf fering from major depression and
given antidepressants. If the doctors focus on their restlessness and lack of
attention, they may be categorized as ADHD and treated with Ritalin or
other stimulants. And if the clinic staf f happens to take a trauma history ,
and the patient actually volunteers the relevant information, he or she might
receive the diagnosis of PTSD. None of these diagnoses will be completelyof f the mark, and none of them will begin to meaningfully describe who
these patients are and what they suf fer from.
Psychiatry , as a subspecialty of medicine, aspires to define mental
illness as precisely as, let’ s say , cancer of the pancreas, or streptococcal
infection of the lungs. However , given the complexity of mind, brain, and
human attachment systems, we have not come even close to achieving that
sort of precision. Understanding what is “wrong” with people currently is
more a question of the mind-set of the practitioner (and of what insurance
companies will pay for) than of verifiable, objective facts.
The first serious attempt to create a systematic manual of psychiatric
diagnoses occurred in 1980, with the release of the third edition of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor ders,  the of ficial list of
all mental diseases recognized by the American Psychiatric Association
(AP A). The preamble to the DSM-III warned explicitly that its categories
were insuf ficiently precise to be used in forensic settings or for insurance
purposes. Nonetheless it gradually became an instrument of enormous
power: Insurance companies require a DSM diagnosis for reimbursement,
until recently all research funding was based on DSM diagnoses, and
academic programs are or ganized around DSM categories. DSM labels
quickly found their way into the lar ger culture as well. Millions of people
know that T ony Soprano suf fered from panic attacks and depression and
that Carrie Mathison of Homeland  struggles with bipolar disorder . The
manual has become a virtual industry that has earned the American
Psychiatric Association well over $100 million.1 The question is: Has it
provided comparable benefits for the patients it is meant to serve?
A psychiatric diagnosis has serious consequences: Diagnosis informs
treatment, and getting the wrong treatment can have disastrous ef fects.
Also, a diagnostic label is likely to attach to people for the rest of their lives
and have a profound influence on how they define themselves. I have met
countless patients who told me that they “are” bipolar or borderline or that
they “have” PTSD, as if they had been sentenced to remain in an
under ground dungeon for the rest of their lives, like the Count of Monte
Cristo.
None of these diagnoses takes into account the unusual talents that
many of our patients develop or the creative ener gies they have mustered tosurvive. All too often diagnoses are mere tallies  of  symptoms, leaving
patients such as Marilyn, Kathy , and Mary likely to be viewed as  out-of-
control women who need to be straightened out.
The dictionary defines diagnosis as “ a. The act or process of
identifying or determining the nature and cause of a disease or injury
through evaluation of patient history , examination, and review of laboratory
data. b. The opinion derived from such an evaluation.”2 In this chapter , and
the next, I will discuss the chasm between of ficial diagnoses and what our
patients actually suf fer from and discuss how my colleagues and I have
tried to change the way patients with chronic trauma histories are
diagnosed.
HOW DO YOU T AKE A TRAUMA HIST OR Y?
In 1985 I started to collaborate with psychiatrist Judith Herman, whose first
book, Father -Daughter Incest , had recently been published. W e were both
working at Cambridge Hospital (one of Harvard’ s teaching hospitals) and,
sharing an interest in how trauma had af fected the lives of our patients, we
began to meet regularly and compare notes. W e were struck by how many
of our patients who were diagnosed with borderline personality disorder
(BPD) told us horror stories about their childhoods. BPD is marked by
clinging but highly unstable relationships, extreme mood swings, and self-
destructive behavior , including self-mutilation and repeated suicide
attempts. In order to uncover whether there was, in fact, a relationship
between childhood trauma and BPD, we designed a formal scientific study
and sent of f a grant proposal to the National Institutes of Health. It was
rejected.
Undeterred, Judy and I decided to finance the study ourselves, and we
found an ally in Chris Perry , the director of research at Cambridge Hospital,
who was funded by the National Institutes of Mental Health to study BPD
and other near neighbor diagnoses, so called personality disorders, in
patients recruited from the Cambridge Hospital. He had collected volumes
of valuable data on these subjects but had never inquired about childhood
abuse and neglect. Even though he did not hide his skepticism about our
proposal, he was very generous to us and arranged for us to interview fifty-five patients from the hospital’ s outpatient department, and he agreed to
compare our findings with records in the lar ge database he had already
collected.
The first question Judy and I faced was: How do you take a trauma
history? Y ou can’ t ask a patient point blank: “W ere you molested as a kid?”
or “Did your father beat you up?” How many would trust a complete
stranger with such delicate information? Keeping in mind that people
universally feel ashamed about the traumas they have experienced, we
designed an interview instrument, the T raumatic Antecedents Questionnaire
(T AQ).3 The interview started with a series of simple questions: “Where do
you live, and who do you live with?”; “Who pays the bills and who does the
cooking and cleaning?” It progressed gradually to more revealing questions:
“Who do you rely on in your daily life?” As in: When you’re sick, who
does the shopping or takes you to the doctor? “Who do you talk to when
you are upset?” In other words, who provides you with emotional and
practical support? Some patients gave us surprising answers: “my dog” or
“my therapist”—or “nobody .”
W e then asked similar questions about their childhood: Who lived in
the household? How often did you move? Who was your primary
caretaker? Many of the patients reported frequent relocations that required
them to change schools in the middle of the year . Several had primary
caregivers who had gone to jail, been placed in a mental hospital, or joined
the military . Others had moved from foster home to foster home or had
lived with a string of dif ferent relatives.
The next section of the questionnaire addressed childhood
relationships: “Who in your family was af fectionate to you?” “Who treated
you as a special person?” This was followed by a critical question—one
that, to my knowledge, had never before been asked in a scientific study:
“W as there anybody who you felt safe with growing up?” One out of four
patients we interviewed could not recall anyone they had felt safe with as a
child. W e checked “nobody” on our work sheets and did not comment, but
we were stunned. Imagine  being a child  and not having a source of safety ,
making your way into the world unprotected and unseen.
The questions continued: “Who made the rules at home and enforced
the discipline?” “How were kids kept in line—by talking, scolding,spanking, hitting, locking you up?” “How did your parents solve their
disagreements?” By then the floodgates had usually opened, and many
patients were volunteering detailed information about their childhoods. One
woman had witnessed her little sister being raped; another told us she’d had
her first sexual experience at age eight—with her grandfather . Men and
women reported lying awake at night listening to furniture crashing and
parents screaming; a young man had come down to the kitchen and found
his mother lying in a pool of blood. Others talked about not being picked up
at elementary school or coming home to find an empty house and spending
the night alone. One woman who made her living as a cook had learned to
prepare meals for her family after her mother was jailed on a drug
conviction. Another had been nine when she grabbed and steadied the car ’ s
steering wheel because her drunken mother was swerving down a four -lane
highway during rush hour .
Our patients did not have the option to run away or escape; they had
nobody to turn to and no place to hide. Y et they somehow had to manage
their terror and despair .  They probably went to school the next morning and
tried to pretend that everything was fine. Judy and I realized that the BPD
group’ s problems—dissociation, desperate clinging to whomever might be
enlisted to help—had probably started of f as ways of dealing with
overwhelming emotions and inescapable brutality .
After our interviews Judy and I met to code our patients’ answers—that
is, to translate them into numbers for computer analysis, and Chris Perry
then collated them with the extensive information on these patients he had
stored on Harvard’ s mainframe computer . One Saturday morning in April
he left us a message asking us to come to his of fice. There we found a huge
stack of printouts, on top of which Chris had placed a Gary Larson cartoon
of a group of scientists studying dolphins and being puzzled by “those
strange ‘aw blah es span yol’ sounds.” The data had convinced him that
unless you understand the language of trauma and abuse, you cannot really
understand BPD.
As we later reported in the American Journal of Psychiatry , 81 percent
of the patients diagnosed with BPD at Cambridge Hospital reported severe
histories of child abuse and/or neglect; in the vast majority the abuse began
before age seven.4 This finding was particularly important because itsuggested that the impact of abuse depends, at least in part, on the age at
which it begins. Later research by Martin T eicher at McLean Hospital
showed that dif ferent forms of abuse have dif ferent impacts on various
brain areas at dif ferent stages of development.5 Although numerous studies
have since replicated our findings,6 I still regularly get scientific papers to
review that say things like “It has been hypothesized that borderline patients
may have histories of childhood trauma.” When does a hypothesis become
a scientifically established fact?
Our study clearly supported  the conclusions of John Bowlby .
When children feel pervasively angry or guilty or are chronically
frightened about being abandoned, they have come by such
feelings honestly; that is because of experience. When, for
example, children fear abandonment, it is not in counterreaction to
their intrinsic homicidal ur ges; rather , it is more likely because
they have been abandoned physically or psychologically , or have
been repeatedly threatened with abandonment. When children are
pervasively filled with rage, it is due to rejection or harsh
treatment. When children experience intense inner conflict
regarding their angry feelings, this is likely because expressing
them may be forbidden or even dangerous.
Bowlby noticed that when children must disown powerful experiences they
have had, this creates serious problems, including “chronic distrust of other
people, inhibition of curiosity , distrust of their own senses, and the tendency
to find everything unreal.”7 As we will see, this has important implications
for treatment.
Our study expanded our thinking beyond the impact of particular
horrendous events, the focus of the PTSD diagnosis, to look at the long-
term ef fects of brutalization and neglect in caregiving relationships. It also
raised another critical question: What therapies are ef fective for people with
a history of abuse, particularly those who feel chronically suicidal and
deliberately hurt themselves ?SELF-HARM
During my training I was called from my bed at around 3:00 a.m. three
nights in a row to stitch up a woman who had slashed her neck with
whatever sharp object she could lay her hands on. She told me, somewhat
triumphantly , that  cutting herself made her feel much better . Ever since then
I’d asked myself why . Why do some people deal with being upset by
playing three sets of tennis or drinking a stif f martini, while others carve
their arms with razor blades? Our study showed that having a history of
childhood sexual and physical abuse was a strong predictor of repeated
suicide attempts and self-cutting.8 I wondered if their suicidal ruminations
had started when they were very young and whether they had found
comfort in plotting their escape by hoping to die or doing damage to
themselves. Does inflicting harm on oneself begin as a desperate attempt to
gain some sense of control?
Chris Perry’ s database had follow-up information on all the patients
who were treated in the hospital’ s outpatient clinics, including reports on
suicidality and self-destructive behavior . After three years of therapy
approximately two-thirds of the patients had markedly improved. Now the
question was, which members of the group had benefited from therapy and
which had continued to feel suicidal and self-destructive? Comparing the
patients’ ongoing behavior with our T AQ interviews provided some
answers. The patients who remained self-destructive had told us that they
did not remember feeling safe with anybody as a child; they had reported
being abandoned, shuttled from place to place, and generally left to their
own devices.
I concluded that, if you carry a memory of having felt safe with
somebody long ago, the traces of that earlier af fection can be reactivated in
attuned relationships when you are an adult, whether these occur in daily
life or in good therapy . However , if you lack a deep memory of feeling
loved and safe, the receptors in the brain that respond to human kindness
may simply fail to develop.9 If that is the case, how can people learn to
calm themselves down and feel grounded in their bodies? Again, this has
important implications for therapy , and I’ll return to this question
throughout part 5, on treatment.THE POWER OF DIAGNOSIS
Our study also confirmed that there was a traumatized population quite
distinct from the combat soldiers and accident victims for whom the PTSD
diagnosis had been created. People like Marilyn and Kathy , as well as the
patients Judy and I had studied, and the kids in the outpatient clinic at
MMHC that I described in chapter 7, do not necessarily remember their
traumas (one of the criteria for the PTSD diagnosis) or at least are not
preoccupied with specific memories of their abuse, but they continue to
behave as if they were still in danger . They go from one extreme to the
other; they have trouble staying on task, and they continually lash out
against themselves and others. T o some degree their problems do overlap
with those of combat soldiers, but they are also very dif ferent in that their
childhood trauma has prevented them from developing some of the mental
capacities that adult soldiers possessed before their traumas occurred.
After we realized this, a group of us10 went to see Robert Spitzer , who,
after having guided the development of the DSM-III,  was in the process of
revising the manual. He listened carefully to what we told him. He told us it
was likely that clinicians who spend their days treating a particular patient
population are likely to develop considerable expertise in understanding
what ails them. He suggested that we do a study , a so-called field trial, to
compare the problems of dif ferent groups of traumatized individuals.1 1
Spitzer put me in char ge of the project. First we developed a rating scale
that incorporated all the dif ferent trauma symptoms that had been reported
in the scientific literature, then we interviewed 525 adult patients at five
sites around the country to see if particular populations suf fered from
dif ferent constellations of problems. Our populations fell into three groups:
those with histories of childhood physical or sexual abuse by caregivers;
recent victims of domestic violence; and people who had recently been
through a natural disaster .
There were clear dif ferences among these groups, particularly those on
the extreme ends of the spectrum: victims of child abuse and adults who
had survived natural disasters. The adults who had been abused as children
often had trouble concentrating, complained of always being on edge, and
were filled with self-loathing. They had enormous trouble negotiating
intimate relationships, often veering from indiscriminate, high-risk, andunsatisfying sexual involvements to total sexual shutdown. They also had
lar ge gaps in their memories, often engaged in self-destructive behaviors,
and had a host of medical problems. These symptoms were relatively rare in
the survivors of natural disasters.
Each major diagnosis in the DSM had a workgroup responsible for
suggesting revisions for the new edition. I presented the results of the field
trial to our DSM-IV  PTSD work group, and we voted nineteen to two to
create a new trauma diagnosis for victims of interpersonal trauma:
“Disorders of Extreme Stress, Not Otherwise Specified” (DESNOS), or
“Complex PTSD” for short.12 , 13 W e then eagerly anticipated the publication
of the DSM-IV  in May 1994. But much to our surprise the diagnosis that our
work group had overwhelmingly approved did not appear in the final
product. None of us had been consulted.
This was a tragic exclusion. It meant that lar ge numbers of patients
could not be accurately diagnosed and that clinicians and researchers would
be unable to scientifically develop appropriate treatments for them. Y ou
cannot develop a treatment for a condition that does not exist. Not having a
diagnosis now confronts therapists with a serious dilemma: How do we
treat people who are coping with the fall-out of abuse, betrayal and
abandonment when we are forced  to diagnose them with depression, panic
disorder , bipolar illness, or borderline personality , which do not really
address what they are coping with?
The consequences of caretaker abuse and neglect are vastly more
common and complex than the impact of hurricanes or motor vehicle
accidents. Y et the decision makers who determined the shape of our
diagnostic system decided not to recognize this evidence. T o this day , after
twenty years and four subsequent revisions, the DSM and the entire system
based on it fail victims of child abuse and neglect—just as they ignored the
plight of veterans before PTSD was introduced back in 1980.
THE HIDDEN EPIDEMIC
How do you turn a newborn baby with all its promise and infinite capacities
into a thirty-year -old homeless drunk? As with so many great discoveries,internist V incent Felitti came across the answer to this question
accidentally .
In 1985 Felitti was chief of Kaiser Permanente’ s Department of
Preventive Medicine in San Diego, which at the time was the lar gest
medical screening program in the world. He was also running an obesity
clinic that used a technique called “supplemented absolute fasting” to bring
about dramatic weight loss without sur gery . One day a twenty-eight-year -
old nurse’ s aide showed up in his of fice. Felitti accepted her claim that
obesity was her principal problem and enrolled her in the program. Over the
next fifty-one weeks her weight dropped from 408 pounds to 132 pounds.
However , when Felitti next saw her a few months later , she had
regained more weight than he thought was biologically possible in such a
short time. What had happened? It turned out that her newly svelte body
had attracted a male coworker , who started to flirt with her and then
suggested sex. She went home and began to eat. She stuf fed herself during
the day and ate while sleepwalking at night. When Felitti probed this
extreme reaction, she revealed a lengthy incest history with her grandfather .
This was only the second case of incest Felitti had encountered in his
twenty-three-year medical practice, and yet about ten days later he heard a
similar story . As he and his team started to inquire more closely , they were
shocked to discover that most of their morbidly obese patients had been
sexually abused as children. They also uncovered a host of other family
problems.
In 1990 Felitti went to Atlanta to present data from the team’ s first 286
patient interviews at a meeting of the North American Association for the
Study of Obesity . He was stunned by the harsh response of some experts:
Why did he believe such patients? Didn’ t he realize they would fabricate
any explanation for their failed lives? However , an epidemiologist from the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) encouraged Felitti to
start a much lar ger study , drawing on a general population, and invited him
to meet with a small group of researchers at the CDC. The result was the
monumental investigation of Adverse Childhood Experiences (now know at
the ACE study), a collaboration between the CDC and Kaiser Permanente,
with Robert Anda, MD, and V incent Felitti, MD, as co–principal
investigators.More than fifty thousand Kaiser patients came through the Department
of Preventive Medicine annually for a comprehensive evaluation, filling out
an extensive medical questionnaire in the process. Felitti and Anda spent
more than a year developing ten new questions14 covering carefully defined
categories of adverse childhood experiences, including physical and sexual
abuse, physical and emotional neglect, and family dysfunction, such as
having had parents who were divorced, mentally ill, addicted, or in prison.
They then asked 25,000 consecutive patients if they would be willing to
provide information about childhood events; 17,421 said yes. Their
responses were then compared with the detailed medical records that Kaiser
kept on all patients.
The ACE study revealed that traumatic life experiences during
childhood and adolescence are far more common than expected. The study
respondents were mostly white, middle class, middle aged, well educated,
and financially secure enough to have good medical insurance, and yet only
one-third of the respondents reported no adverse childhood experiences.
One out of ten individuals responded yes to the question “Did a
parent or other adult in the household often or very often swear
at you, insult you, or put you down?”
More than a quarter responded yes to the questions “Did one of
your parents often or very often push, grab, slap, or throw
something at you?” and “Did one of your parents often or very
often hit you so hard that you had marks or were injured?” In
other words, more than a quarter of the U.S. population is likely
to have been repeatedly physically abused as a child.
T o the questions “Did an adult or person at least 5 years older
ever have you touch their body in a sexual way?” and “Did an
adult or person at least 5 years older ever attempt oral, anal, or
vaginal intercourse with you?” 28 percent of women and 16
percent of men responded af firmatively .
One in eight people responded positively to the questions: “As a
child, did you witness your mother sometimes, often, or very
often pushed, grabbed, slapped, or had something thrown at
her?” “As a child, did you witness your mother sometimes,often, or very often kicked, bitten, hit with a fist, or hit with
something hard?”15
Each yes answer was scored as one point, leading to a possible ACE
score ranging from zero to ten. For example, a person who experienced
frequent verbal abuse, who had an alcoholic mother , and whose parents
divorced would have an ACE score of three. Of the two-thirds of
respondents who reported an adverse experience, 87 percent scored two or
more. One in six of all respondents had an ACE score of four or higher .
In short, Felitti and his team had found that adverse experiences are
interrelated, even though they’re usually studied separately . People
typically don’ t grow up in a household where one brother is in prison but
everything else is fine. They don’ t live in families where their mother is
regularly beaten but life is otherwise hunky-dory . Incidents of abuse are
never stand-alone events. And for each additional adverse experience
reported, the toll in later damage increases.
Felitti and his team found that the ef fects of childhood trauma first
become evident in school. More than half of those with ACE scores of four
or higher reported having learning or behavioral problems, compared with 3
percent of those with a score of zero. As the children matured, they didn’ t
“outgrow” the ef fects of their early experiences. As Felitti notes,
“T raumatic experiences are often lost in time and concealed by shame,
secrecy , and social taboo,” but the study revealed that the impact of trauma
pervaded these patients’ adult lives. For example, high ACE scores turned
out to correlate with higher workplace absenteeism, financial problems, and
lower lifetime income.
When it came to personal suf fering, the results were devastating. As the
ACE score rises, chronic depression in adulthood also rises dramatically .
For those with an ACE score of four or more, its prevalence is 66 percent in
women and 35 percent in men, compared with an overall rate of 12 percent
in those with an ACE score of zero. The likelihood of being on
antidepressant medication or prescription painkillers also rose
proportionally . As Felitti has pointed out, we may be treating today
experiences that happened fifty years ago—at ever -increasing cost.
Antidepressant drugs and painkillers constitute a significant portion of ourrapidly rising national health-care expenditures.16 (Ironically , research has
shown that depressed patients without prior histories of abuse or neglect
tend to respond much better to antidepressants than patients with those
backgrounds.17)
Self-acknowledged suicide attempts rise exponentially with ACE
scores. From a score of zero to a score of six there is about a 5,000 percent
increased likelihood of suicide attempts. The more isolated and unprotected
a person feels, the more death will feel like the only escape. When the
media report an environmental link to a 30 percent increase in the risk of
some cancer , it is headline news, yet these far more dramatic figures are
overlooked.
As part of their initial medical evaluation, study participants were
asked, “Have you ever considered yourself to be an alcoholic?” People with
an ACE score of four were seven times more likely to be alcoholic than
adults with a score of zero. Injection drug use increased exponentially: For
those with an ACE score of six or more, the likelihood of IV drug use was
4,600 percent greater than in those with a score of zero.
W omen in the study were asked about rape during adulthood. At an
ACE score of zero, the prevalence of rape was 5 percent; at a score of four
or more it was 33 percent. Why are abused or neglected girls so much more
likely to be raped later in life? The answers to this question have
implications far beyond rape. For example, numerous studies  have shown
that girls who witness domestic violence while growing up are at much
higher risk of ending up in violent relationships themselves,  while for boys
who witness domestic violence, the risk that they will abuse their own
partners rises sevenfold.18 More than 12 percent of study participants had
seen their mothers being battered.
The list of high-risk behaviors predicted by the ACE score included
smoking, obesity , unintended pregnancies, multiple sexual partners, and
sexually transmitted diseases. Finally , the toll of major health problems was
striking: Those with an ACE score of six or above had a 15 percent or
greater chance than those with an ACE score of zero of currently suf fering
from any of the ten leading causes of death in the United States, including
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), ischemic heart disease, and
liver disease. They were twice as likely to suf fer from cancer and four timesas likely to have emphysema. The ongoing stress on the body keeps taking
its toll.
WHEN PROBLEMS ARE REALL Y SOLUTIONS
T welve years after he originally treated her , Felitti again saw the woman
whose dramatic weight loss and gain had started him on his quest. She told
him that she’d subsequently had bariatric sur gery but that after she’d lost
ninety-six pounds she’d become suicidal. It had taken five psychiatric
hospitalizations and three courses of electroshock to control her suicidality .
Felitti points out that obesity , which is considered a major public health
problem, may in fact be a personal solution for many . Consider the
implications: If you mistake someone’ s solution for a problem to be
eliminated, not only are they likely to fail treatment, as often happens in
addiction programs, but other problems may emer ge.
One female rape victim told Felitti, “Overweight is overlooked, and
that’ s the way I need to be.”19 W eight can protect men, as well. Felitti
recalls two guards at a state prison in his obesity program. They promptly
regained the weight they had lost, because they felt a lot safer being the
biggest guy on the cellblock. Another male patient became obese after his
parents divorced and he moved in with his violent alcoholic grandfather . He
explained: “It wasn’ t that I ate because I was hungry and all of that. It was
just a place for me to feel safe. All the way from kinder garten I used to get
beat up all the time. When I got the weight on it didn’ t happen anymore.”
The ACE study group concluded: “Although widely understood to be
harmful to health, each adaptation [such as smoking, drinking, drugs,
obesity] is notably dif ficult to give up. Little consideration is given to the
possibility that many long-term health risks might also be personally
beneficial in the short term. W e repeatedly hear from patients of the benefits
of these ‘health risks.’ The idea of the problem being a solution, while
understandably disturbing to many , is certainly in keeping with the fact that
opposing forces routinely coexist in biological systems. . . . What one sees,
the presenting problem, is often only the marker for the real problem, which
lies buried in time, concealed by patient shame, secrecy and sometimes
amnesia—and frequently clinician discomfort.”CHILD ABUSE: OUR NA TION’S LARGEST PUBLIC
HEAL TH PROBLEM
The first time I heard Robert Anda present the results of the ACE study , he
could not hold back his tears. In his career at the CDC he had previously
worked in several major risk areas, including tobacco research and
cardiovascular health. But when the ACE study data started to appear on his
computer screen, he realized that they had stumbled upon the gravest and
most costly public health issue in the United States: child abuse. He had
calculated that its overall costs exceeded those of cancer or heart disease
and that eradicating child abuse in America would reduce the overall rate of
depression by more than half, alcoholism by two-thirds, and suicide, IV
drug use, and domestic violence by three-quarters.20 It would also have a
dramatic ef fect on workplace performance and vastly decrease the need for
incarceration.
When the sur geon general’ s report on smoking and health was
published in 1964, it unleashed a decades-long legal and medical campaign
that has changed daily life and long-term health prospects for millions. The
number of American smokers fell from 42 percent of adults in 1965 to 19
percent in 2010, and it is estimated that nearly 800,000 deaths from lung
cancer were prevented between 1975 and 2000.21
The ACE study , however , has had no such ef fect. Follow-up studies
and papers are still appearing around the world, but the day-to-day reality of
children like Marilyn and the children in outpatient clinics and residential
treatment centers around the country remains virtually the same. Only now
they receive high doses of psychotropic agents, which makes them more
tractable but which also impairs their ability to feel pleasure and curiosity ,
to grow and develop emotionally and intellectually , and to become
contributing members of society .TC H A P T E R  1 0
D E V E L O P M E N T A L  T R A U M A :  T H E
H I D D E N  E P I D E M I C
The notion that early childhood adverse experiences lead to
substantial developmental disruptions is more clinical intuition
than a research-based fact. There is no known evidence of
developmental disruptions that were preceded in time in a causal
fashion by any type of trauma syndrome.
—Fr om the American Psychiatric Association’ s r ejection of a Developmental
T rauma Disorder diagnosis, May 201 1
Research on the ef fects of early maltreatment tells a dif ferent
story: that early maltreatment has enduring negative ef fects on
brain development. Our brains are sculpted by our early
experiences. Maltreatment is a chisel that shapes a brain to contend
with strife, but at the cost of deep, enduring wounds. Childhood
abuse isn’ t something you “get over .” It is an evil that we must
acknowledge and confront if we aim to do anything about the
unchecked cycle of violence in this country .
—Martin T eicher , MD, PhD, Scientific American
here are hundreds of thousands of children like the ones I am about to
describe, and they absorb enormous resources, often withoutappreciable benefit. They end up filling our jails, our welfare rolls, and our
medical clinics. Most of the public knows them only as statistics. T ens of
thousands of schoolteachers, probation of ficers, welfare workers, judges,
and mental health professionals spend their days trying to help them, and
the taxpayer pays the bills.
Anthony was only two and a half when he was referred to our T rauma
Center by a child-care center because its employees could not manage his
constant biting and pushing, his refusal to take naps, and his intractable
crying, head banging, and rocking. He did not feel safe with any staf f
member and fluctuated between despondent collapse and angry defiance.
When we met with him and his mother , he anxiously clung to her ,
hiding his face, while she kept saying, “Don’ t be such a baby .” He startled
when a door banged somewhere down the corridor and then burrowed
deeper into his mom’ s lap. When she pushed him away , he sat in a corner
and started to bang his head. “He just does that to bug me,” his mother
remarked. When we asked about her own background, she told us that she’d
been abandoned by her parents and raised by a series of relatives who hit
her , ignored her , and started to sexually abuse her at age thirteen. She’d
become pregnant by a drunken boyfriend who left her when she told him
she was carrying his child. Anthony was just like his father , she said—a
good-for -nothing. She had had numerous violent rows with subsequent
boyfriends, but she was sure that this had happened too late at night for
Anthony to notice.
If Anthony were admitted to a hospital, he would likely be diagnosed
with a host of dif ferent psychiatric disorders: depression, oppositional
defiant disorder , anxiety , reactive attachment disorder , ADHD, and PTSD.
None of these diagnoses, however , would clarify what was wrong with
Anthony: that he was scared to death and fighting for his life, and he did not
trust that his mother could help him.
Then there’ s Maria, a fifteen-year -old Latina, one of the more than half
a million kids in the United States who grow up in foster care and
residential treatment programs. Maria is obese and aggressive. She has a
history of sexual, physical, and emotional abuse and has lived in more than
twenty out-of-home placements since age eight. The pile of medical charts
that arrived with her described her as mute, vengeful, impulsive, reckless,and self-harming, with extreme mood swings and an explosive temper . She
describes herself as “garbage, worthless, rejected.”
After multiple suicide attempts Maria was placed in one of our
residential treatment centers. Initially she was mute and withdrawn and
became violent when people got too close to her . After other approaches
failed to work, she was placed in an equine therapy program where she
groomed her horse daily and learned simple dressage. T wo years later I
spoke with Maria at her high school graduation. She had been accepted by a
four -year college. When I asked her what had helped her most, she
answered, “The horse I took care of.” She told me that she first started to
feel safe with her horse; he was there every day , patiently waiting for her ,
seemingly glad upon her approach. She started to feel a visceral connection
with another creature and began to talk to him like a friend. Gradually she
started talking with the other kids in the program and, eventually , with her
counselor .
V ir ginia is a thirteen-year -old adopted white girl. She was taken away
from her biological mother because of the mother ’ s drug abuse; after her
first adoptive mother fell ill and died, she moved from foster home to foster
home before being adopted again. V ir ginia was seductive with any male
who crossed her path, and she reported sexual and physical abuse by
various babysitters and temporary caregivers. She came to our residential
treatment program after thirteen crisis hospitalizations for suicide attempts.
The staf f described her as isolated, controlling, explosive, sexualized,
intrusive, vindictive, and narcissistic. She described herself as disgusting
and said she wished she were dead. The diagnoses in her chart were bipolar
disorder , intermittent explosive disorder , reactive attachment disorder ,
attention deficit disorder (ADD) hyperactive subtype, oppositional defiant
disorder (ODD), and substance use disorder . But who, really , is V ir ginia?
How can we help her have a life?1
W e can hope to solve the problems of these children only if we
correctly define what is going on with them and do more than developing
new drugs to control them or trying to find “the” gene that is responsible for
their “disease.” The challenge is to find ways to help them lead productive
lives and, in so doing, save hundreds of millions of dollars of taxpayers’
money . That process starts with facing the facts.BAD GENES?
W ith such pervasive problems and such dysfunctional parents we would be
tempted to ascribe their problems simply to bad genes. T echnology always
produces new directions for research, and when it became possible to do
genetic testing, psychiatry became committed to finding the genetic causes
of mental illness. Finding a genetic link seemed particularly relevant for
schizophrenia, a fairly common (af fecting about 1 percent of the
population), severe, and perplexing form of mental illness and one that
clearly runs in families. And yet after thirty years and millions upon
millions of dollars’ worth of research, we have failed to find consistent
genetic patterns for schizophrenia—or for any other psychiatric illness, for
that matter .2 Some of my colleagues have also worked hard to discover
genetic factors that predispose people to develop traumatic stress.3 That
quest continues, but so far it has failed to yield any solid answers.4
Recent research has swept away the simple idea that “having” a
particular gene produces a particular result. It turns out that many genes
work together to influence a single outcome. Even more important, genes
are not fixed; life events  can trigger biochemical messages that  turn them
on or of f by attaching methyl groups, a cluster of carbon and hydrogen
atoms, to the outside of the gene (a process called methylation), making it
more or less sensitive to messages from the body . While life events can
change the behavior of the gene, they do not alter its fundamental structure.
Methylation patterns, however , can be passed on to of fspring—a
phenomenon known as epigenetics. Once again, the body keeps the score,
at the deepest levels of the or ganism.
One of the most cited experiments in epigenetics was conducted by
McGill University researcher Michael Meaney , who studies newborn rat
pups and their mothers.5 He discovered that how much a mother rat licks
and grooms her pups during the first twelve hours after their birth
permanently af fects the brain chemicals that respond to stress—and
modifies the configuration of over a thousand genes. The rat pups that are
intensively licked by their mothers are braver and produce lower levels of
stress hormones under stress than rats whose mothers are less attentive.
They also recover more quickly—an equanimity that lasts throughout theirlives. They develop thicker connections in the hippocampus, a key center
for learning and memory , and they perform better in an important rodent
skill—finding their way through mazes.
W e are just beginning to learn that stressful experiences af fect gene
expression in humans, as well. Children whose pregnant mothers had been
trapped in unheated houses in a prolonged ice storm in Quebec had major
epigenetic changes compared with the children of mothers whose heat had
been restored within a day .6 McGill researcher Moshe Szyf compared the
epigenetic profiles of hundreds of children born into the extreme ends of
social privilege in the United Kingdom and measured the ef fects of child
abuse on both groups. Dif ferences in social class were associated with
distinctly dif ferent epigenetic profiles, but abused children in both groups
had in common specific modifications in seventy-three genes. In Szyf ’ s
words, “Major changes to our bodies can be made not just by chemicals and
toxins, but also in the way the social world talks to the hard-wired
world.”7 , 8
MONKEYS CLARIFY OLD QUESTIONS ABOUT NA TURE
VERSUS NUR TURE
One of the clearest ways of understanding how the quality of parenting and
environment af fects the expression of genes comes from the work of
Stephen Suomi, chief of the National Institutes of Health’ s Laboratory of
Comparative Ethology .9 For more than forty years Suomi has been studying
the transmission of personality through generations of rhesus monkeys,
which share 95 percent of human genes, a number exceeded only by
chimpanzees and bonobos. Like humans, rhesus monkeys live in lar ge
social groups with complex alliances and status relationships, and only
members who can synchronize their behavior with the demands of the troop
survive and flourish.
Rhesus monkeys are also like humans in their attachment patterns.
Their infants depend on intimate physical contact with their mothers, and
just as Bowlby observed in humans, they develop by exploring their
reactions to their environment, running back to their mothers whenever theyfeel scared or lost. Once they become more independent, play with their
peers is the primary way they learn to get along in life.
Suomi identified two personality types that consistently ran into
trouble: uptight, anxious monkeys, who become fearful, withdrawn, and
depressed even in situations where other monkeys will play and explore;
and highly aggressive monkeys, who make so much trouble that they are
often shunned, beaten up, or killed. Both types are biologically dif ferent
from their peers. Abnormalities in arousal levels, stress hormones, and
metabolism of brain chemicals like serotonin can be detected within the
first few weeks of life, and neither their biology nor their behavior tends to
change as they mature. Suomi discovered a wide range of genetically driven
behaviors. For example, the uptight monkeys (classified as such on the
basis of both their behavior and their high cortisol levels at six months) will
consume more alcohol in experimental situations than the others when they
reach the age of four . The genetically aggressive monkeys also overindulge
—but they binge drink to the point of passing out, while the uptight
monkeys seem to drink to calm down.
And yet the social environment also contributes significantly to
behavior and biology . The uptight, anxious females don’ t play well with
others and thus often lack social support when they give birth and are at
high risk for neglecting or abusing their firstborns. But when these females
belong to a stable social group they often become diligent mothers who
carefully watch out for their young. Under some conditions being an
anxious mom can provide much needed protection. The aggressive mothers,
on the other hand, did not provide any social advantages: very punitive with
their of fspring, there is lots of hitting, kicking, and biting. If the infants
survive, their mothers usually keep them from making friends with their
peers.
In real life it is impossible to tell whether people’ s aggressive or uptight
behavior is the result of parents’ genes or of having been raised by an
abusive mother—or both. But in a monkey lab you can take newborns with
vulnerable genes away from their biological mothers and have them raised
by supportive mothers or in playgroups with peers.
Y oung monkeys who are taken away from their mothers at birth and
brought up solely with their peers become intensely attached to them. They
desperately cling to one another and don’ t peel away enough to engage inhealthy exploration and play . What little play there is lacks the complexity
and imagination typical of normal monkeys. These monkeys grow up to be
uptight: scared in new situations and lacking in curiosity . Regardless of
their genetic predisposition, peer -raised monkeys overreact to minor
stresses: Their cortisol increases much more in response to loud noises than
does that of monkeys who were raised by their mothers. Their serotonin
metabolism is even more abnormal than that of the monkeys who are
genetically predisposed to aggression but who were raised by their own
mothers. This leads to the conclusion that, at least in monkeys, early
experience has at least as much impact on biology as heredity does.
Monkeys and humans share the same two variants of the serotonin gene
(known as the short and long serotonin transporter alleles). In humans the
short allele has been associated with impulsivity , aggression, sensation
seeking, suicide attempts, and severe depression. Suomi showed that, at
least in monkeys, the environment shapes how these genes af fect behavior .
Monkeys with the short allele that were raised by an adequate mother
behaved normally and had no deficit in their serotonin metabolism. Those
who were raised with their peers became aggressive risk takers.10 Similarly ,
New Zealand researcher Alec Roy found that humans  with the short allele
had higher rates of depression than those with the long version but that this
was true only if they also had a childhood history of abuse or neglect. The
conclusion is clear: Children who are fortunate enough to have an attuned
and attentive parent are not going to develop this genetically related
problem.1 1
Suomi’ s work supports everything we’ve learned from our colleagues
who study human attachment and from our own clinical research: Safe and
protective early relationships are critical to protect children from long-term
problems. In addition, even parents with their own genetic vulnerabilities
can pass on that protection to the next generation provided that they are
given the right support.
THE NA TIONAL CHILD TRAUMA TIC STRESS
NETWORKNearly every medical disease, from cancer to retinitis pigmentosa, has
advocacy groups that promote the study and treatment of that particular
condition. But until 2001, when the National Child T raumatic Stress
Network was established by an act of Congress, there was no
comprehensive or ganization dedicated to the research and treatment of
traumatized children.
In 1998 I received a call from Adam Cummings from the Nathan
Cummings Foundation telling me that they were interested in studying the
ef fects of trauma on learning. I told them that while some very good work
had been done on that subject,12 there was no forum to implement the
discoveries that had already been made. The mental, biological, or moral
development of traumatized children was not being systematically taught to
child-care workers, to pediatricians, or in graduate schools of psychology or
social work.
Adam and I agreed that we had to address this problem. Some eight
months later we convened a think tank that included representatives from
the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and the U.S.
Department of Justice, Senator T ed Kennedy’ s health-care adviser , and a
group of my colleagues who specialized in childhood trauma. W e all were
familiar with the basics of how trauma af fects the developing mind and
brain, and we all were aware that childhood trauma is radically dif ferent
from traumatic stress in fully formed adults. The group concluded that, if
we hoped to ever put the issue of childhood trauma firmly on the map, there
needed to be a national or ganization that would promote both the study of
childhood trauma and the education of teachers, judges, ministers, foster
parents, physicians, probation of ficers, nurses, and mental health
professionals—anyone who deals with abused and traumatized kids.
One member of our work group, Bill Harris, had extensive experience
with child-related legislation, and he went to work with Senator Kennedy’ s
staf f to craft our ideas into law . The bill establishing the National Child
T raumatic Stress Network was ushered through the Senate with
overwhelming bipartisan support, and since 2001 it has grown from a
collaborative network of 17 sites to more than 150 centers nationwide. Led
by coordinating centers at Duke University and UCLA, the NCTSN
includes universities, hospitals, tribal agencies, drug rehab programs,mental health clinics, and graduate schools. Each of the sites, in turn,
collaborates with local school systems, hospitals, welfare agencies,
homeless shelters, juvenile justice programs, and domestic violence
shelters, with a total of well over 8,300 af filiated partners.
Once the NCTSN was up and running, we had the means to assemble a
clearer profile of traumatized kids in every part of the country . My T rauma
Center colleague Joseph Spinazzola led a survey that examined the records
of nearly two thousand children and adolescents from agencies across the
network.13 W e soon confirmed what we had suspected: The vast majority
came from extremely dysfunctional families. More than half had been
emotionally abused and/or had a caregiver who was too impaired to care for
their needs. Almost 50 percent had temporarily lost caregivers to jail,
treatment programs, or military service and had been looked after by
strangers, foster parents, or distant relatives. About half reported having
witnessed domestic violence, and a quarter were also victims of sexual and
/or physical abuse. In other words, the children and adolescents in the
survey were mirrors of the middle-aged, middle-class Kaiser Permanente
patients with high ACE scores that V incent Felitti had studied in the
Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study .
THE POWER OF DIAGNOSIS
In the 1970s there was no way to classify the wide-ranging symptoms of
hundreds of thousands of returning V ietnam veterans. As we saw in the
opening chapters of this book, this forced clinicians to improvise the
treatment of their patients and prevented them from being able to
systematically study what approaches actually worked. The adoption of the
PTSD diagnosis by the DSM III in 1980 led to extensive scientific studies
and to the development of ef fective treatments, which turned out to be
relevant not only to combat veterans but also to victims of a range of
traumatic events, including rape, assault, and motor vehicle accidents.14 An
example of the far -ranging power of having a specific diagnosis is the fact
that between 2007 and 2010 the Department of Defense spent more than
$2.7 billion for the treatment of and research on PTSD in combat veterans,while in fiscal year 2009 alone the Department of V eterans Af fairs spent
$24.5 million on in-house PTSD research.
The DSM definition of PTSD is quite straightforward: A person is
exposed to a horrendous event “that involved actual or threatened death or
serious injury , or a threat to the physical integrity of self or others,” causing
“intense fear , helplessness, or horror ,” which results in a variety of
manifestations: intrusive reexperiencing of the event (flashbacks, bad
dreams, feeling as if the event were occurring), persistent and crippling
avoidance (of people, places, thoughts, or feelings associated with the
trauma, sometimes with amnesia for important parts of it), and increased
arousal (insomnia, hypervigilance, or irritability). This description suggests
a clear story line: A person is suddenly and unexpectedly devastated by an
atrocious event and is never the same again. The trauma may be over , but it
keeps being replayed in continually recycling memories and in a
reor ganized nervous system.
How relevant was this definition to the children we were seeing? After
a single traumatic incident—a dog bite, an accident, or witnessing a school
shooting—children can indeed develop basic PTSD symptoms similar to
those of adults, even if they live in safe and supportive homes. As a result
of having the PTSD diagnosis, we now can treat those problems quite
ef fectively .
In the case of the troubled children with histories of abuse and neglect
who show up in clinics, schools, hospitals, and police stations, the traumatic
roots of their behaviors are less obvious, particularly because they rarely
talk about having been hit, abandoned, or molested, even when asked.
Eighty two percent of the traumatized children seen in the National Child
T raumatic Stress Network do not meet diagnostic criteria for PTSD.15
Because they often are shut down, suspicious, or aggressive they now
receive pseudoscientific diagnoses such as “oppositional defiant disorder ,”
meaning “This kid hates my guts and won’ t do anything I tell him to do,” or
“disruptive mood dysregulation disorder ,” meaning he has temper tantrums.
Having as many problems as they do, these kids accumulate numerous
diagnoses over time. Before they reach their twenties, many patients have
been given four , five, six, or more of these impressive but meaningless
labels. If they receive treatment at all, they get whatever is beingpromulgated as the method of management du jour: medications, behavioral
modification, or exposure therapy . These rarely work and often cause more
damage.
As the NCTSN treated more and more kids, it became increasingly
obvious that we needed a diagnosis that captured the reality of their
experience. W e began with a database of nearly twenty thousand kids who
were being treated in various sites within the network and collected all the
research articles we could find on abused and neglected kids. These were
winnowed down to 130 particularly relevant studies that reported on more
than one hundred thousand children and adolescents worldwide. A core
work group of twelve clinician/researchers specializing in childhood
trauma16 then convened twice a year for four years to draft a proposal for an
appropriate diagnosis, which we decided to call Developmental T rauma
Disorder .17
As we or ganized our findings, we discovered a consistent profile: (1) a
pervasive pattern of dysregulation, (2) problems with attention and
concentration, and (3) dif ficulties getting along with themselves and others.
These children’ s moods and feelings rapidly shifted from one extreme to
another—from temper tantrums and panic to detachment, flatness, and
dissociation. When they got upset (which was much of the time), they could
neither calm themselves down nor describe what they were feeling.
Having a biological system that keeps pumping out stress hormones to
deal with real or imagined threats leads to physical problems: sleep
disturbances, headaches, unexplained pain, oversensitivity to touch or
sound. Being so agitated or shut down keeps them from being able to focus
their attention and concentration. T o relieve their tension, they engage in
chronic masturbation, rocking, or self-harming activities (biting, cutting,
burning, and hitting themselves, pulling their hair out, picking at their skin
until it bled). It also leads to dif ficulties with language processing and fine-
motor coordination. Spending all their ener gy on staying in control, they
usually have trouble paying attention to things, like schoolwork, that are not
directly relevant to survival, and their hyperarousal makes them easily
distracted.
Having been frequently ignored or abandoned leaves them clinging and
needy , even with the people who have abused them. Having beenchronically beaten, molested, and otherwise mistreated, they can not help
but define themselves as defective and worthless. They come by their self-
loathing, sense of defectiveness, and worthlessness honestly . W as it any
surprise that they didn’ t trust anyone? Finally , the combination of feeling
fundamentally despicable and overreacting to slight frustrations makes it
dif ficult for them to make friends.
W e published the first articles about our findings, developed a validated
rating scale,18 and collected data on about 350 kids and their parents or
foster parents to establish that this one diagnosis, Developmental T rauma
Disorder , captured the full range of what was wrong with these children. It
would enable us to give them a single diagnosis, as opposed to multiple
labels, and would firmly locate the origin of their problems in a
combination of trauma and compromised attachment.
In February 2009 we submitted our proposed new diagnosis of
Developmental T rauma Disorder to the American Psychiatric Association,
stating the following in a cover letter:
Children who develop in the context of ongoing danger ,
maltreatment and disrupted caregiving systems are being ill served
by the current diagnostic systems that lead to an emphasis on
behavioral control with no recognition of interpersonal trauma.
Studies on the sequelae of childhood trauma in the context of
caregiver abuse or neglect consistently demonstrate chronic and
severe problems with emotion regulation, impulse control,
attention and cognition, dissociation, interpersonal relationships,
and self and relational schemas. In absence of a sensitive trauma-
specific diagnosis, such children are currently diagnosed with an
average of 3–8 co-morbid disorders. The continued practice of
applying multiple distinct co-morbid diagnoses to traumatized
children has grave consequences: it defies parsimony , obscures
etiological clarity , and runs the danger of relegating treatment and
intervention to a small aspect of the child’ s psychopathology rather
than promoting a comprehensive treatment approach.Shortly after submitting our proposal, I gave a talk on Developmental
T rauma Disorder in W ashington DC to a meeting of the mental health
commissioners from across the country . They of fered to support our
initiative by writing a letter to the AP A. The letter began by pointing out
that the National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors
served 6.1 million people annually , with a budget of $29.5 billion, and
concluded: “W e ur ge the AP A to add developmental trauma to its list of
priority areas to clarify and better characterize its course and clinical
sequelae and to emphasize the strong need to address developmental trauma
in the assessment of patients.”
I felt confident that this letter would ensure that the AP A would take
our proposal seriously , but several months after our submission, Matthew
Friedman, executive director of the National Center for PTSD and chair of
the relevant DSM subcommittee, informed us that DTD was unlikely to be
included in the DSM-5. The consensus, he wrote, was that no new diagnosis
was required to fill a “missing diagnostic niche.” One million children who
are abused and neglected every year in the United States a “diagnostic
niche”?
The letter went on: “The notion that early childhood adverse
experiences lead to substantial developmental disruptions is more clinical
intuition than a research-based fact. This statement is commonly made but
cannot be backed up by prospective studies.” In fact, we had included
several prospective studies in our proposal. Let’ s look at just  two of them
here.
HOW RELA TIONSHIPS SHAPE DEVELOPMENT
Beginning in 1975 and continuing for almost thirty years, Alan Sroufe and
his colleagues tracked 180 children and their families through the
Minnesota Longitudinal Study of Risk and Adaptation.19 At the time the
study began there was an intense debate about the role of nature versus
nurture, and temperament versus environment in human development, and
this study set out to answer those questions. T rauma was not yet a popular
topic, and child abuse and neglect were not a central focus of this study—atleast initially , until they emer ged as the most important predictors of adult
functioning.
W orking with local medical and social agencies, the researchers
recruited first-time (Caucasian) mothers who were poor enough to qualify
for public assistance but who had dif ferent backgrounds and dif ferent kinds
and levels of support available for parenting. The study began three months
before the children were born and followed the children for thirty years into
adulthood, assessing and, where relevant, measuring all the major aspects of
their functioning and all the significant circumstances of their lives. It
considered several fundamental questions: How do children learn to pay
attention while regulating their arousal (i.e., avoiding extreme highs or
lows) and keeping their impulses under control? What kinds of supports do
they need, and when are these needed?
After extensive interviews and testing of the prospective parents, the
study really got of f the ground in the newborn nursery , where researchers
observed the newborns and interviewed the nurses caring for them. They
then made home visits seven and ten days after birth. Before the children
entered first grade, they and their parents were carefully assessed a total of
fifteen times. After that, the children were interviewed and tested at regular
intervals until age twenty-eight, with continuing input from mothers and
teachers.
Sroufe and his colleagues found that quality of care and biological
factors were closely interwoven. It is fascinating to see how the Minnesota
results echo—though with far greater complexity—what Stephen Suomi
found in his primate laboratory . Nothing was written in stone. Neither the
mother ’ s personality , nor the infant’ s neurological anomalies at birth, nor its
IQ, nor its temperament—including its activity level and reactivity to stress
—predicted whether a child would develop serious behavioral problems in
adolescence.20 The key issue, rather , was the nature of the parent-child
relationship: how parents  felt about and interacted with their kids. As with
Suomi’ s monkeys, the combination of vulnerable infants and inflexible
caregivers made for clingy , uptight kids. Insensitive, pushy , and intrusive
behavior on the part of the parents at six months predicted hyperactivity and
attention problems in kinder garten and beyond.21Focusing on many facets of development, particularly relationships
with caregivers, teachers, and peers, Sroufe and his colleagues found that
caregivers not only help keep arousal within manageable bounds but also
help infants develop their own ability to regulate their arousal. Children
who were regularly pushed over the edge into overarousal and
disor ganization did not develop proper attunement of their inhibitory and
excitatory brain systems and grew up expecting that they would lose control
if something upsetting happened. This was a vulnerable population, and by
late adolescence half of them had diagnosable mental health problems.
There were clear patterns: The children who received consistent caregiving
became well-regulated kids, while erratic caregiving produced kids who
were chronically physiologically aroused. The children of unpredictable
parents often clamored for attention and became intensely frustrated in the
face of small challenges. Their persistent arousal made them chronically
anxious. Constantly looking for reassurance got in the way of playing and
exploration, and, as a result, they grew up chronically nervous and
nonadventurous.
Early parental neglect or harsh treatment led to behavior problems in
school and predicted troubles with peers and a lack of empathy for the
distress of others.22 This set up a vicious cycle: Their chronic arousal,
coupled with lack of parental comfort, made them disruptive, oppositional,
and aggressive. Disruptive and aggressive kids are unpopular and provoke
further rejection and punishment, not only from their caregivers but also
from their teachers and peers.23
Sroufe also learned a great deal about resilience: the capacity to bounce
back from adversity . By far the most important predictor of how well his
subjects coped with life’ s inevitable disappointments was the level of
security established with their primary caregiver during the first two years
of life. Sroufe informally told me that he thought that resilience in
adulthood could be predicted by how lovable mothers rated their kids at age
two.24
THE LONG-TERM EFFECTS OF INCESTIn 1986 Frank Putnam and Penelope T rickett, his colleague at the National
Institute of Mental Health, initiated the first longitudinal study of the impact
of sexual abuse on female development.25 Until the results of this study
came out, our knowledge about the ef fects of incest was based entirely on
reports from children who had recently disclosed their abuse and on
accounts from adults reconstructing years or even decades later how incest
had af fected them. No study had ever followed girls as they matured to
examine how sexual abuse might influence their school performance, peer
relationships, and self-concept, as well as their later dating life. Putnam and
T rickett also looked at changes over time in their subjects’ stress hormones,
reproductive hormones, immune function, and other physiological
measures. In addition they explored potential protective factors, such as
intelligence and support from family and peers.
The researchers painstakingly recruited eighty-four girls referred by the
District of Columbia Department of Social Services who had a confirmed
history of sexual abuse by a family member . These were matched with a
comparison group of eighty-two girls of the same age, race, socioeconomic
status, and family constellation who had not been abused. The average
starting age was eleven. Over the next twenty years these two groups were
thoroughly assessed six times, once a year for the first three years and again
at ages eighteen, nineteen, and twenty-five. Their mothers participated in
the early assessments, and their own children took part in the last. A
remarkable 96 percent of the girls, now grown women, have stayed in the
study from its inception.
The results were unambiguous: Compared with girls of the same age,
race, and social circumstances, sexually abused girls suf fer from a lar ge
range of profoundly negative ef fects, including cognitive deficits,
depression, dissociative symptoms, troubled sexual development, high rates
of obesity , and self-mutilation. They dropped out of high school at a higher
rate than the control group and had more major illnesses and health-care
utilization. They also showed abnormalities in their stress hormone
responses, had an earlier onset of puberty , and accumulated a host of
dif ferent, seemingly unrelated, psychiatric diagnoses.
The follow-up research revealed many details of how abuse af fects
development. For example, each time they were assessed, the girls in bothgroups were asked to talk about the worst thing that had happened to them
during the previous year . As they told their stories, the researchers observed
how upset they became, while measuring their physiology . During the first
assessment all the girls reacted by becoming distressed. Three years later , in
response to the same question,  the nonabused girls once again displayed
signs of distress, but the abused girls shut down and became numb. Their
biology matched their observable reactions: During the first assessment all
of the girls showed an increase in the stress hormone cortisol; three years
later cortisol went down in the abused girls as they reported on the most
stressful event of the past year . Over time the body adjusts to chronic
trauma. One of the consequences of numbing is that teachers, friends, and
others are not likely to notice that a girl is upset; she may not even register
it herself. By numbing out she no longer reacts to distress the way she
should, for example, by taking protective action.
Putnam’ s study also captured the pervasive long-term ef fects of incest
on friendships and partnering. Before the onset of puberty nonabused girls
usually have several girlfriends, as well as one boy who functions as a sort
of spy who informs them about what these strange creatures, boys, are all
about. After they enter adolescence, their contacts with boys gradually
increase. In contrast, before puberty the abused girls rarely have close
friends, girls or boys, but adolescence brings many chaotic and often
traumatizing contacts with boys.
Lacking friends in elementary school makes a crucial dif ference. T oday
we’re aware how cruel third-, fourth-, and fifth-grade girls can be. It’ s a
complex and rocky time when friends can suddenly turn on one another and
alliances dissolve in exclusions and betrayals. But there is an upside: By the
time girls get to middle school, most have begun to master a whole set of
social skills, including being able to identify what they feel, negotiating
relationships with others, pretending to like people they don’ t, and so on.
And most of them have built a fairly steady support network of girls who
become their stress-debriefing team. As they slowly enter the world of sex
and dating, these relationships give them room for reflection, gossip, and
discussion of what it all means.
The sexually abused girls have an entirely dif ferent developmental
pathway . They don’ t have friends of either gender because they can’ t trust;
they hate themselves, and their biology is against them, leading them eitherto overreact or numb out. They can’ t keep up in the normal envy-driven
inclusion/exclusion games, in which players have to stay cool under stress.
Other kids usually don’ t want anything to do with them—they simply are
too weird.
But that’ s only the beginning of the trouble. The abused, isolated girls
with incest histories mature sexually a year and a half earlier than the
nonabused girls. Sexual abuse speeds up their biological clocks and the
secretion of sex hormones. Early in puberty the abused girls had three to
five times the levels of testosterone and androstenedione, the hormones that
fuel sexual desire, as the girls in the control group.
Results of Putnam and T rickett’ s study continue to be published, but it
has already created an invaluable road map for clinicians dealing with
sexually abused girls. At the T rauma Center , for example, one of our
clinicians reported on a Monday morning that a patient named A yesha had
been raped—again—over the weekend. She had run away from her group
home at five o’clock on Saturday , gone to a place in Boston where druggies
hang out, smoked some dope and done some other drugs, and then left with
a bunch of boys in a car . At five o’clock Sunday morning they had gang-
raped her . Like so many of the adolescents we see, A yesha can’ t articulate
what she wants or needs and can’ t think through how she might protect
herself. Instead, she lives in a world of actions. T rying to explain her
behavior in terms of victim/perpetrator isn’ t helpful, nor are labels like
“depression,” “oppositional defiant disorder ,” “intermittent explosive
disorder ,” “bipolar disorder ,” or any of the other options our diagnostic
manuals of fer us. Putnam’ s work has helped us understand how A yesha
experiences the world—why she cannot tell us what is going on with her ,
why she is so impulsive and lacking in self-protection, and why she views
us as frightening and intrusive rather than as people who can help her .
THE DSM-5: A VERIT ABLE SMORGASBORD OF
“DIAGNOSES”
When DSM-5 was published in May 2013 it included some three hundred
disorders in its 945 pages. It of fers a veritable smor gasbord of possible
labels for the problems associated with severe early-life trauma, includingsome new ones such as Disruptive Mood Regulation Disorder ,26 Non-
suicidal Self Injury , Intermittent Explosive Disorder , Dysregulated Social
Engagement Disorder , and Disruptive Impulse Control Disorder .27
Before the late nineteenth century doctors classified illnesses according
to their surface manifestations, like fevers and pustules, which was not
unreasonable, given that they had little else to go on.28 This changed when
scientists like Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch discovered that many
diseases were caused by bacteria that were invisible to the naked eye.
Medicine then was transformed by its attempts to discover ways to get rid
of those or ganisms rather than just treating the boils and the fevers that they
caused. W ith DSM-5 psychiatry firmly regressed to early-nineteenth-
century medical practice. Despite the fact that we know the origin of many
of the problems it identifies, its “diagnoses” describe surface phenomena
that completely ignore the underlying causes.
Even before DSM-5 was released, the American Journal of Psychiatry
published the results of validity tests of various new diagnoses, which
indicated that the DSM lar gely lacks what in the world of science is known
as “reliability”—the ability to produce consistent, replicable results. In
other words, it lacks scientific validity . Oddly , the lack of reliability and
validity did not keep the DSM-5 from meeting its deadline for publication,
despite the near -universal consensus that it represented no improvement
over the previous diagnostic system.29 Could the fact that the AP A had
earned $100 million on the DSM-IV and is slated to take in a similar
amount with the DSM-5 (because all mental health practitioners, many
lawyers, and other professionals will be obliged to purchase the latest
edition) be the reason we have this new diagnostic system?
Diagnostic reliability isn’ t an abstract issue: If doctors can’ t agree on
what ails their patients, there is no way they can provide proper treatment.
When there’ s no relationship between diagnosis and cure, a mislabeled
patient is bound to be a mistreated patient. Y ou would not want to have your
appendix removed when you are suf fering from a kidney stone, and you
would not want have somebody labeled as “oppositional” when, in fact, his
behavior is rooted in an attempt to protect himself against real danger .
In a statement released in June 201 1, the British Psychological Society
complained to the AP A that the sources of psychological suf fering in theDSM-5 were identified “as located within individuals” and overlooked the
“undeniable social causation of many such problems.”30 This was in
addition to a flood of protest from American professionals, including
leaders of the American Psychological Association and the American
Counseling Association. Why are relationships or social conditions left out?
31 If you pay attention only to faulty biology and defective genes as the
cause of mental problems and ignore abandonment, abuse, and deprivation,
you are likely to run into as many dead ends as previous generations did
blaming it all on terrible mothers.
The most stunning rejection of the DSM-5 came from the National
Institute of Mental Health, which funds most psychiatric research in
America. In April 2013, a few weeks before DSM-5 was formally released,
NIMH director Thomas Insel announced that his agency could no longer
support DSM’ s “symptom-based diagnosis.”32 Instead the institute would
focus its funding on what are called Research Domain Criteria (RDoC)33 to
create a framework for studies that would cut across current diagnostic
categories. For example, one of the NIMH domains is “Arousal/Modulatory
Systems (Arousal, Circadian Rhythm, Sleep and W akefulness),” which are
disturbed to varying degrees in many patients.
Like the DSM-5, the RDoC framework conceptualizes mental illnesses
solely as brain disorders. This means that future research funding will
explore the brain circuits “and other neurobiological measures” that
underlie mental problems. Insel sees this as a first step toward the sort of
“precision medicine that has transformed cancer diagnosis and treatment.”
Mental illness, however , is not at all like cancer: Humans are social
animals, and mental problems involve not being able to get along with other
people, not fitting in, not belonging, and in general not being able to get on
the same wavelength.
Everything about us—our brains, our minds, and our bodies—is geared
toward collaboration in social systems. This is our most powerful survival
strategy , the key to our success as a species, and it is precisely this that
breaks down in most forms of mental suf fering. As we saw in part 2, the
neural connections in brain and body are vitally important for
understanding human suf fering, but it is important not to ignore the
foundations of our humanity: relationships and interactions that shape ourminds and brains when we are young and that give substance and meaning
to our entire lives.
People with histories of abuse, neglect, or severe deprivation will
remain mysterious and lar gely untreated unless we heed the admonition of
Alan Sroufe: “T o fully understand how we become the persons we are—the
complex, step-by-step evolution of our orientations, capacities, and
behavior over time—requires more than a list of ingredients, however
important any one of them might be. It requires an understanding of the
process of development, how all of these factors work together in an
ongoing way over time.”34
Frontline mental health workers—overwhelmed and underpaid social
workers and therapists alike—seem to agree with our approach. Shortly
after the AP A rejected Developmental T rauma Disorder for inclusion in the
DSM, thousands of clinicians from around the country sent small
contributions to the T rauma Center to help us conduct a lar ge scientific
study , known as a field trial, to further study DTD. That support has
enabled us to interview hundreds of kids, parents, foster parents, and mental
health workers at five dif ferent network sites over the last few years with
scientifically constructed interview tools. The first results from these
studies have now been published, and more will appear as this book is
going to print.35
WHA T DIFFERENCE WOULD DTD MAKE?
One answer is that it would focus research and treatment (not to mention
funding) on the central principles that underlie the protean symptoms of
chronically traumatized children and adults: pervasive biological and
emotional dysregulation, failed or disrupted attachment, problems staying
focused and on track, and a hugely deficient sense of coherent personal
identity and competence. These issues transcend and include almost all
diagnostic categories, but treatment that doesn’ t put them front and center is
more than likely to miss the mark. Our great challenge is to apply the
lessons of neuroplasticity , the flexibility of brain circuits, to rewire the
brains and reor ganize the minds of people who have been programmed by
life itself to experience others as threats and themselves as helpless.Social support is a biological necessity , not an option, and this reality
should be the backbone of all prevention and treatment. Recognizing the
profound ef fects of trauma and deprivation on child development need not
lead to blaming parents. W e can assume that parents do the best they can,
but all parents need help to nurture their kids. Nearly every industrialized
nation, with the exception of the United States, recognizes this and provides
some form of guaranteed support to families. James Heckman, winner of
the 2000 Nobel Prize in Economics, has shown that quality early-childhood
programs that  involve parents and promote basic skills in disadvantaged
children more than pay for themselves in improved outcomes.36
In the early 1970s psychologist David Olds was working in a Baltimore
day-care center where many of the preschoolers came from homes wracked
by poverty , domestic violence, and drug abuse. A ware that only addressing
the children’ s problems at school was not suf ficient to improve their home
conditions, he started a home-visitation program in which skilled nurses
helped mothers to provide a safe and stimulating environment for their
children and, in the process, to imagine a better future for themselves.
T wenty years later , the children of the home-visitation mothers were not
only healthier but also less likely to report having been abused or neglected
than a similar group whose mothers had not been visited. They also were
more likely to have finished school, to have stayed out of jail, and to be
working in well-paying jobs. Economists have calculated that every dollar
invested in high-quality home visitation, day care, and preschool programs
results in seven dollars of savings on welfare payments, health-care costs,
substance-abuse treatment, and incarceration, plus higher tax revenues due
to better -paying jobs.37
When I go to Europe to teach, I often am contacted by of ficials at the
ministries of health in the Scandinavian countries, the United Kingdom,
Germany , or the Netherlands and asked to spend an afternoon with them
sharing the latest research on the treatment of traumatized children,
adolescents, and their families. The same is true for many of my colleagues.
These countries have already made a commitment to universal health care,
ensuring a guaranteed minimum wage, paid parental leave for both parents
after a child is born, and high-quality childcare for all working mothers.Could this approach to public health have something to do with the fact
that the incarceration rate in Norway is 71/100,000, in the Netherlands
81/100,000, and the US 781/100,000, while the crime rate in those countries
is much lower than in ours, and the cost of medical care about half? Seventy
percent of prisoners in California spent time in foster care while growing
up. The United States spends $84 billion per year to incarcerate people at
approximately $44,000 per prisoner; the northern European countries a
fraction of that amount. Instead, they invest in helping parents to raise their
children in safe and predictable surroundings. Their academic test scores
and crime rates seem to reflect the success of those investments.P AR T FOUR
THE IMPRINT OF
TRAUMAIC H A P T E R  1 1
U N C O V E R I N G  S E C R E T S :  T H E
P R O B L E M  O F  T R A U M A T I C  M E M O R Y
It is a strange thing that all the memories have these two qualities.
They are always full of quietness, that is the most striking thing
about them; and even when things weren’ t like that in reality , they
still seem to have that quality . They are soundless apparitions,
which speak to me by looks and gestures, wordless and silent—
and their silence is precisely what disturbs me.
—Erich Maria Remar que, All Quiet on the W estern Front
n the spring of 2002 I was asked to examine a young man who claimed to
have been sexually abused while he was growing up by Paul Shanley , a
Catholic priest who had served in his parish in Newton, Massachusetts.
Now twenty-five years old, he had apparently for gotten the abuse until he
heard that the priest  was currently under investigation for molesting young
boys . The question posed to me was: Even though he had seemingly
“repressed” the abuse for well over a decade after it ended, were his
memories credible, and was I prepared to testify to that fact before a judge?
I will share what this man, whom I’ll call Julian, told me, drawing on
my original case notes. (Even though his real name is in the public record,
I’m using a pseudonym because I hope that he has regained some privacy
and peace with the passage of time.1)His experiences illustrate the complexities of traumatic memory . The
controversies over the case against Father Shanley are also typical of the
passions that have swirled around this issue since psychiatrists first
described the unusual nature of traumatic memories in the final decades of
the nineteenth century .
FLOODED BY SENSA TIONS AND IMAGES
On February 1 1, 2001, Julian was serving as a military policeman at an air
force base. During his daily phone conversation with his girlfriend, Rachel,
she  mentioned a lead article she’d read that morning in the Boston Globe.  A
priest named Shanley was under suspicion for molesting children. Hadn’ t
Julian once told her about a Father Shanley who had been his parish priest
back in Newton? “Did he ever do anything to you?” she asked. Julian
initially recalled Father Shanley as a kind man who’d been very supportive
after his parents got divorced. But as the conversation went on, he started to
go into a panic. He suddenly saw Shanley silhouetted in a doorframe, his
hands stretched out at forty-five degrees, staring at Julian as he urinated.
Overwhelmed by emotion, he told Rachel, “I’ve got to go.” He called his
flight chief, who came over accompanied by the first ser geant. After he met
with the two of them, they took him to the base chaplain. Julian recalls
telling him: “Do you know what is going on in Boston? It happened to me,
too.” The moment he heard himself say those words, he knew for certain
that Shanley had molested him—even though he did not remember the
details. Julian felt extremely embarrassed about being so emotional; he had
always been a strong kid who kept things to himself.
That night he sat on the corner of his bed, hunched over , thinking he
was losing his mind and terrified that he would be locked up. Over the
subsequent week images kept flooding into his mind, and he was afraid of
breaking down completely . He thought about taking a knife and plunging it
into his leg just to stop the mental pictures. Then the panic attacks started to
be accompanied by seizures, which he called “epileptic fits.”  He scratched
his body until he bled . He constantly felt hot, sweaty , and agitated.  Between
panic attacks he “felt like a zombie”; he was observing himself from adistance, as if what he was experiencing were actually happening to
somebody else.
In April he received an administrative dischar ge, just ten days short of
being eligible to receive full benefits.
When Julian entered my of fice almost a year later , I saw a handsome,
muscular guy who looked depressed and defeated. He told me immediately
that he felt terrible about having left the air force. He had wanted to make it
his career , and he’d always received excellent evaluations. He loved the
challenges and the teamwork, and he missed the structure of the military
lifestyle.
Julian was born in a Boston suburb, the second-oldest of five children.
His father left the family when Julian was about six because he could not
tolerate living with Julian’ s emotionally labile mother . Julian and his father
get along quite well, but he sometimes reproaches his father for having
worked too hard to support his family and for abandoning him to the care of
his unbalanced mother . Neither his parents nor any of his siblings has ever
received psychiatric care or been involved with drugs.
Julian was a popular athlete in high school. Although he had many
friends, he felt pretty bad about himself and covered up for being a poor
student by drinking and partying. He feels ashamed that he took advantage
of his popularity and good looks by having sex with many girls. He
mentioned wanting to call several of them to apologize for how badly he’d
treated them.
He remembered always hating his body . In high school he took steroids
to pump himself up and smoked marijuana almost every day . He did not go
to college, and after graduating from high school he was virtually homeless
for almost a year because he could no longer stand living with his mother .
He enlisted to try to get his life back on track.
Julian met Father Shanley at age six when he was taking a CCD
(catechism) class at the parish church. He remembered Father Shanley
taking him out of the class for confession. Father Shanley rarely wore a
cassock, and Julian remembered the priest’ s dark blue corduroy pants. They
would go to a big room with one chair facing another and a  bench to kneel
on. The chairs were covered with red and there was a red velvet cushion on
the bench. They played cards, a game of war that turned into strip poker .
Then he remembered standing in front of a mirror in that room. FatherShanley made him bend over . He remembered Father Shanley putting a
finger into his anus. He does not think Shanley ever penetrated him with his
penis, but he believes that the priest fingered him on numerous occasions.
Other than that, his memories were quite incoherent and fragmentary .
He had flashes of images of Shanley’ s face and of isolated incidents:
Shanley standing in the door of the bathroom; the priest going down on his
knees and moving “it” around with his tongue. He  could not say  how old he
was when that happened. He remembered the priest telling him how to
perform oral sex, but he did not remember actually doing it. He
remembered passing out pamphlets in church and then Father Shanley
sitting next to him in a pew , fondling him with one hand and holding
Julian’ s hand on himself with the other . He remembered that, as he grew
older , Father Shanley would pass close to him and caress his penis. Paul did
not like it but did not know what to do to stop it. After all, he told me,
“Father Shanley was the closest thing to God in my neighborhood.”
In addition to these memory fragments, traces of his sexual abuse were
clearly being activated and replayed. Sometimes when he was having sex
with his girlfriend, the priest’ s image popped into his head, and, as he said,
he would “lose it.” A week before I interviewed him, his girlfriend had
pushed a finger into his mouth and playfully said: “Y ou give good head.”
Julian jumped up and screamed, “If you ever say that again I’ll fucking kill
you.” Then, terrified, they both started to cry . This was followed by one of
Julian’ s “epileptic fits,” in which he curled up in a fetal position, shaking
and whimpering like a baby . While telling me this Julian looked very small
and very frightened.
Julian alternated between feeling sorry for the old man that Father
Shanley had become and simply wanting to “take him into a room
somewhere and kill him.” He also spoke repeatedly of how ashamed he felt,
how hard it was to admit that he could not protect himself: “Nobody fucks
with me, and now I have to tell you this.” His self-image was of a big,
tough Julian.
How do we make sense of a story like Julian’ s: years of apparent
for getting, followed by fragmented, disturbing images, dramatic physical
symptoms, and sudden reenactments? As a therapist treating people with a
legacy of trauma, my primary concern is not to determine exactly what
happened to them but to help them tolerate the sensations, emotions, andreactions they experience without being constantly hijacked by them. When
the subject of blame arises, the central issue that needs to be addressed is
usually self-blame—accepting that the trauma was not their fault, that it
was not caused by some defect in themselves, and that no one could ever
have deserved what happened to them.
Once a legal case is involved, however , determination of culpability
becomes primary , and with it the admissibility of evidence. I had previously
examined twelve people who had been sadistically abused as children in a
Catholic orphanage in Burlington, V ermont. They had come forward (with
many other claimants) more than four decades later , and although none had
had any contact with the others until the first claim was filed, their abuse
memories were astonishingly similar: They all named the same names and
the particular abuses that each nun or priest had committed—in the same
rooms, with the same furniture, and as part of the same daily routines. Most
of them subsequently accepted an out-of-court settlement from the V ermont
diocese.
Before a case goes to trial, the judge holds a so-called Daubert hearing
to set the standards for expert testimony to be presented to the jury . In a
1996 case I had convinced a federal circuit court judge in Boston that it was
common for traumatized people to lose all memories of the event in
question, only to regain access to them in bits and pieces at a much later
date. The same standards would apply in Julian’ s case. While my report to
his lawyer remains confidential, it was based on decades of clinical
experience and research on traumatic memory , including the work of some
of the great pioneers of modern psychiatry .
NORMAL VERSUS TRAUMA TIC MEMOR Y
W e all know how fickle memory is; our stories change and are constantly
revised and updated. When my brothers, sisters, and I talk about events in
our childhood, we always end up feeling that we grew up in dif ferent
families—so many of our memories simply do not match. Such
autobiographical memories are not precise reflections of reality; they are
stories we tell to convey our personal take on our experience.The extraordinary capacity of the human mind to rewrite memory is
illustrated in the Grant Study of Adult Development, which has
systematically followed the psychological and physical health of more than
two hundred Harvard men from their sophomore years of 1939–44 to the
present.2 Of course, the designers of the study could not have anticipated
that most of the participants would go of f to fight in W orld W ar II, but we
can now track the evolution of their wartime memories. The men were
interviewed in detail about their war experiences in 1945/1946 and again in
1989/1990. Four and a half decades later , the majority gave very dif ferent
accounts from the narratives recorded in their immediate postwar
interviews: W ith the passage of time, events had been bleached of their
intense horror . In contrast, those who had been traumatized and
subsequently developed PTSD did not modify their accounts; their
memories were preserved essentially intact forty-five years after the war
ended.
Whether we remember a particular event at all, and how accurate our
memories of it are, lar gely depends on how personally meaningful it was
and how emotional we felt about it at the time. The key factor is our level of
arousal. W e all have memories associated with particular people, songs,
smells, and places that stay with us for a long time. Most of us still have
precise memories of where we were and what we saw on T uesday ,
September 1 1, 2001, but only a fraction of us  recall anything in particular
about September 10.
Most day-to-day experience passes immediately into oblivion. On
ordinary days we don’ t have much to report when we come home in the
evening. The mind works according to schemes or maps, and incidents that
fall outside the established pattern are most likely to capture our attention.
If we get a raise or a friend tells us some exciting news, we will retain the
details of the moment, at least for a while. W e remember insults and injuries
best: The adrenaline that we secrete to defend against potential threats helps
to engrave those incidents into our minds. Even if the content of the remark
fades, our dislike for the person who made it usually persists.
When something terrifying happens, like seeing a child or a friend get
hurt in an accident, we will retain an intense and lar gely accurate memory
of the event for a long time. As James McGaugh and colleagues haveshown, the more adrenaline you secrete, the more precise your memory will
be.3 But that is true only up to a certain point. Confronted with horror—
especially the horror of “inescapable shock”—this system becomes
overwhelmed and breaks down.
Of course, we cannot monitor what happens during a traumatic
experience, but we can reactivate the trauma in the laboratory , as was done
for the brain scans in chapters 3 and 4. When memory traces of the original
sounds, images, and sensations are reactivated, the frontal lobe shuts down,
including, as we’ve seen, the region necessary to put feelings into words,4
the region that creates our sense of location in time, and the thalamus,
which integrates the raw data of incoming sensations. At this point the
emotional brain, which is not under conscious control and cannot
communicate in words, takes over . The emotional brain (the limbic area and
the brain stem) expresses its altered activation through changes in
emotional arousal, body physiology , and muscular action. Under ordinary
conditions these two memory systems—rational and emotional—
collaborate to produce an integrated response. But high arousal not only
changes the balance between them but also disconnects other brain areas
necessary for the proper storage and integration of incoming information,
such as the hippocampus and the thalamus.5 As a result, the imprints of
traumatic experiences are or ganized not as coherent logical narratives but in
fragmented sensory and emotional traces: images, sounds, and physical
sensations.6 Julian saw a man with outstretched arms, a pew , a staircase, a
strip poker game; he felt a sensation in his penis, a panicked sense of dread.
But there was little or no story .
UNCOVERING THE SECRETS OF TRAUMA
In the late nineteenth century , when medicine first began the systematic
study of mental problems, the nature of traumatic memory was one of the
central topics under discussion. In France and England a prodigious number
of articles were published on a syndrome known as “railway spine,” a
psychological aftermath of railroad accidents that included loss of memory .
The greatest advances, however , came in the study of hysteria, a mental
disorder characterized by emotional outbursts, susceptibility to suggestion,and contractions and paralyses of the muscles that could not be explained
by simple anatomy .7 Once considered an af fliction of unstable or
malingering women (the name comes from the Greek word for “womb”),
hysteria now became a window into the mysteries of mind and body . The
names of some of the greatest pioneers in neurology and psychiatry , such as
Jean-Martin Charcot, Pierre Janet, and Sigmund Freud, are associated with
the discovery that trauma is at the root of hysteria, particularly the trauma
of childhood sexual abuse.8 These early researchers referred to traumatic
memories as “pathogenic secrets”9 or “mental parasites,”10 because as
much as the suf ferers wanted to for get whatever had happened, their
memories kept forcing themselves into consciousness, trapping them in an
ever -renewing present of existential horror .1 1
The interest in hysteria was particularly strong in France,  and, as so
often happens, its roots lay in the politics of the day . Jean-Martin Charcot,
who is widely regarded as the father of neurology and whose pupils, such as
Gilles de la T ourette, lent their names to numerous neurological diseases,
was also active in politics. After Emperor Napoleon III abdicated in 1870,
there was a struggle between the monarchists (the old order backed by the
cler gy), and the advocates of the fledgling French Republic, who believed
in science and in secular democracy . Charcot believed that women would be
a critical factor in this struggle, and his investigation of hysteria “of fered a
scientific explanation for phenomena such as demonic possession states,
witchcraft, exorcism, and religious ecstasy .”12
Charcot conducted meticulous studies of the physiological and
neurological correlates of hysteria in both men and women, all of which
emphasized embodied memory and a lack of language. For example,  in
1889 he published the case of a patient  named LeLog,  who developed
paralysis of the legs after being involved in a traf fic accident with a horse-
drawn cart. Although Lelog fell to the ground and lost consciousness, his
legs appeared unhurt, and there were no neurological signs that would
indicate a physical cause for his paralysis. Charcot discovered that just
before Lelog passed out, he saw the wheels of the cart approaching him and
strongly believed he would be run over . He noted that “the patient . . . does
not preserve any recollection. . . . Questions addressed to him upon this
point are attended with no result. He knows nothing or almost nothing.”13Like many other patients at the Salpêtrière, Lelog expressed his experience
physically: Instead of remembering the accident, he developed paralysis of
his legs.14
P AINTING BY ANDRE BROUILLET
Jean-Martin Char cot pr esents the case of a patient with hysteria.  Charcot transformed La
Salpêtrière, an ancient asylum for the poor of Paris, which he transformed into a modern
hospital. Notice the patient’ s dramatic posture.
But for me the real hero of this story is Pierre Janet, who helped
Charcot establish a research laboratory devoted to the study of hysteria at
the Salpêtrière. In 1889, the same year that the Eif fel T ower was built, Janet
published the first book-length scientific account of traumatic stress:
L ’automatisme psychologique .15 Janet proposed that at the root of what we
now call PTSD was the experience of “vehement emotions,” or intense
emotional arousal. This treatise explained that, after having been
traumatized, people automatically keep repeating certain actions, emotions,
and sensations related to the trauma.  And unlike Charcot, who wasprimarily interested in measuring and documenting patients’ physical
symptoms, Janet spent untold hours talking with them, trying to discover
what was going on in their minds. Also in contrast to Charcot, whose
research focused on understanding the phenomenon of hysteria, Janet was
first and foremost a clinician whose goal was to treat his patients. That is
why I studied his case reports in detail and why he became one of my most
important teachers.16
AMNESIA, DISSOCIA TION, AND REENACTMENT
Janet was the first to point out the dif ference between “narrative
memory”—the stories people tell about trauma—and traumatic memory
itself. One of his case histories was the story of Irène, a young woman who
was hospitalized following her mother ’ s death from tuberculosis.17 Irène
had nursed her mother for many months while continuing to work outside
the home to support her alcoholic father and pay for her mother ’ s medical
care. When her mother finally died, Irène—exhausted from stress and lack
of sleep—tried for several hours to revive the corpse, calling out to her
mother and trying to force medicine down her throat. At one point the
lifeless body dropped of f the bed while Irène’ s drunken father lay passed
out nearby . Even after an aunt arrived and started preparing for the burial,
Irène’ s denial persisted. She had to be persuaded to attend the funeral, and
she laughed throughout the service. A few weeks later she was brought to
the Salpêtrière, where Janet took over her case.
In addition to amnesia for her mother ’ s death, Irène suf fered from
another symptom: Several times a week she would stare, trancelike, at an
empty bed, ignore whatever was going on around her , and begin to care for
an imaginary person. She meticulously reproduced, rather than
remembered, the details of her mother ’ s death.
T raumatized people simultaneously remember too little and too much.
On the one hand, Irène had no conscious memory of her mother ’ s death—
she could not tell the story of what had happened. On the other she was
compelled to physically act out the events of her mother ’ s death. Janet’ s
term “automatism” conveys the involuntary , unconscious nature of her
actions.Janet treated Irène for several months, mainly with hypnosis. At the
end he asked her again about her mother ’ s death. Irène started to cry and
said, “Don’ t remind me of those terrible things. . . . My mother was dead
and my father was a complete drunk, as always. I had to take care of her
dead body all night long. I did a lot of silly things in order to revive her . . . .
In the morning I lost my mind.” Not only was Irène able tell the story , but
she had also recovered her emotions: “I feel very sad and abandoned.” Janet
now called her memory “complete” because it now was accompanied by the
appropriate feelings.
Janet noted significant dif ferences between ordinary and traumatic
memory . T raumatic memories are precipitated by specific triggers. In
Julian’ s case the trigger was his girlfriend’ s seductive comments; in Irène’ s
it was a bed. When one element of a traumatic experience is triggered, other
elements are likely to automatically follow .
T raumatic memory is not condensed: It took Irène three to four hours to
reenact her story , but when she was finally able to tell what had happened it
took  less than a minute. The traumatic enactment serves no function. In
contrast, ordinary memory is adaptive; our stories are flexible and can be
modified to fit the circumstances. Ordinary memory is essentially social;
it’ s a story that we tell for a purpose: in Irène’ s case, to enlist her doctor ’ s
help and comfort; in Julian’ s case, to recruit me to join his search for justice
and revenge. But there is nothing social about traumatic memory . Julian’ s
rage at his girlfriend’ s remark served no useful purpose. Reenactments are
frozen in time, unchanging, and they are always lonely , humiliating, and
alienating experiences.
Janet coined the term “dissociation” to describe the splitting of f and
isolation of memory imprints that he saw in his patients. He was also
prescient about the heavy cost of keeping these traumatic memories at bay .
He later wrote that when patients dissociate their traumatic experience, they
become  “attached to an insurmountable obstacle”:18 “[U]nable to integrate
their traumatic memories, they seem to lose their capacity to assimilate new
experiences as well. It is . . . as if their personality has definitely stopped at
a certain point, and cannot enlar ge any more by the addition or assimilation
of new elements.”19 He predicted that unless they became aware of the
split-of f elements and integrated them into a story that had happened in thepast but was now over , they would experience a slow decline in their
personal and professional functioning. This phenomenon has now been well
documented in contemporary research.20
Janet discovered that, while it is normal to change and distort one’ s
memories, people with PTSD are unable to put the actual event, the source
of those memories, behind them .  Dissociation prevents the trauma from
becoming integrated within the conglomerated, ever -shifting stores of
autobiographical memory , in essence creating a dual memory system.
Normal memory integrates the elements of each experience into the
continuous flow of self-experience by a complex process of association;
think of a dense but flexible network where each element exerts a subtle
influence on many others. But in Julian’ s case, the sensations, thoughts, and
emotions of the trauma were stored separately as frozen, barely
comprehensible fragments. If the problem with PTSD is dissociation , the
goal of treatment would be association : integrating the cut-of f elements of
the trauma into the ongoing narrative of life, so that the brain can recognize
that “that was then, and this is now .”
THE ORIGINS OF THE “T ALKING CURE”
Psychoanalysis was born on the wards of the Salpêtrière. In 1885 Freud
went to Paris to work with Charcot, and he later named his firstborn son
Jean-Martin in Charcot’ s honor . In 1893 Freud and his V iennese mentor ,
Josef Breuer , cited both Charcot and Janet in a brilliant paper on the cause
of hysteria. “ Hysterics suffer mainly fr om r eminiscences,”  they proclaim,
and go on to note that these memories are not subject to the “wearing away
process” of normal memories but “persist for a long time with astonishing
freshness.” Nor can traumatized people control when they will emer ge: “W e
must . . . mention another remarkable fact . . . namely , that these memories,
unlike other memories of their past lives, are not at the patients’ disposal.
On the contrary , these experiences ar e completely absent fr om the patients’
memory when they ar e in a normal psychical state, or ar e only pr esent in a
highly summary form. ”21 (All italics in the quoted passages are Breuer and
Freud’ s.)Breuer and Freud believed that traumatic memories were lost to
ordinary consciousness either because “circumstances made a reaction
impossible,” or because they started during “severely paralyzing af fects,
such as fright.” In 1896 Freud boldly claimed that “the ultimate cause of
hysteria is always the seduction of the child by an adult.”22 Then, faced
with his own evidence of an epidemic of abuse in the best families of
V ienna—one, he noted, that would implicate his own father—he quickly
began to retreat. Psychoanalysis shifted to an emphasis on unconscious
wishes and fantasies, though Freud occasionally kept acknowledging the
reality of sexual abuse.23 After the horrors of W orld W ar I confronted him
with the reality of combat neuroses, Freud reaf firmed that lack of verbal
memory is central in trauma and that, if a person does not remember , he is
likely to act out: “[H]e reproduces it not as a memory but as an action; he
repeats it, without knowing, of course, that he is repeating, and in the end,
we understand that this is his way of remembering.”24
The lasting legacy of Breuer and Freud’ s 1893 paper is what we now
call the “talking cure”:  “ [W]e  found, to our great surprise, at first, that  each
individual hysterical symptom immediately and permanently disappear ed
when we had succeeded in bringing clearly to light the memory of the event
by which it was pr ovoked and in ar ousing its accompanying affect, and
when the patient had described that event in the gr eatest possible detail and
had put the affect into wor ds  (all italics in original). Recollection without
af fect almost invariably produces no result. ”
They explain that unless there is an “ener getic reaction” to the
traumatic event, the af fect “remains attached to the memory” and cannot be
dischar ged. The reaction can be dischar ged by an action—“from tears to
acts of revenge.” “But language serves as a substitute for action; by its help,
an af fect can be ‘abreacted’ almost as ef fectively .” “It will now be
understood,” they conclude, “how it is that the psychotherapeutic procedure
which we have described in these pages has a curative ef fect. It brings to an
end the operative for ce . . . which was not abr eacted in the first instance
[i.e., at the time of the trauma] , by allowing its strangulated affect to find a
way out thr ough speech; and it subjects it to associative corr ection by
intr oducing it into normal consciousness.”Even though psychoanalysis is today in eclipse, the “talking cure” has
lived on, and psychologists have generally assumed that telling the trauma
story in great detail will help people to leave it behind. That is also a basic
premise of cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), which today is taught in
graduate psychology courses around the world.
Although the diagnostic labels have changed, we continue to see
patients similar to those described by Charcot, Janet, and Freud. In 1986 my
colleagues and I wrote up the case of a woman who had been a cigarette girl
at Boston’ s Cocoanut Grove nightclub when it burned down in 1942.25
During the 1970s and 1980s she annually reenacted her escape on Newbury
Street, a few blocks from the original location, which resulted in her being
hospitalized with diagnoses like schizophrenia and bipolar disorder . In 1989
I reported on a V ietnam veteran who yearly staged an “armed robbery” on
the exact anniversary of a buddy’ s death.26 He would put a finger in his
pants pocket, claim that it was a pistol, and tell a shopkeeper to empty his
cash register—giving him plenty of time to alert the police. This
unconscious attempt to commit “suicide by cop” came to an end after a
judge referred the veteran to me for treatment. Once we had dealt with his
guilt about his friend’ s death, there were no further reenactments.
Such incidents raise a critical question: How can doctors, police
of ficers, or social workers recognize that someone is suf fering from
traumatic stress as long as he reenacts rather than remember? How can
patients themselves identify the source of their behavior? If their history is
not known, they are likely to be labeled as crazy or punished as criminals
rather than helped to integrate the past.
TRAUMA TIC MEMOR Y ON TRIAL
At least two dozen men had claimed they were molested by Paul Shanley ,
and many of them reached civil settlements with the Boston archdiocese.
Julian was the only victim who was called to testify in Shanley’ s trial. In
February 2005 the former priest was found guilty on two counts of raping a
child and two counts of assault and battery on a child. He was sentenced to
twelve to fifteen years in prison.In 2007 Shanley’ s attorney , Robert F . Shaw Jr ., filed a motion for a new
trial, challenging Shanley’ s convictions as a miscarriage of justice. Shaw
tried to make the case that “repressed memories” were not generally
accepted in the scientific community , that the convictions were based on
“junk science,” and that there had been insuf ficient testimony about the
scientific status of repressed memories before the trial. The appeal was
rejected by the original trial judge but two years later was taken up by the
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts. Almost one hundred leading
psychiatrists and psychologists from around the United States and eight
foreign countries signed an amicus curiae brief stating that “repressed
memory” has never been shown to exist and that it should not have been
admitted as evidence. However , on January 10, 2010, the court
unanimously upheld Shanley’ s conviction with this statement: “In sum, the
judge’ s finding that the lack of scientific testing did not make unreliable the
theory that an individual may experience dissociative amnesia was
supported in the record. . . . There was no abuse of discretion in the
admission of expert testimony on the subject of dissociative amnesia.”
In the following chapter I’ll talk more about memory and for getting
and about how the debate over repressed memory , which started with Freud,
continues to be played out today .SC H A P T E R  1 2
T H E  U N B E A R A B L E  H E A V I N E S S  O F
R E M E M B E R I N G
Our bodies are the texts that carry the memories and therefore
remembering is no less than reincarnation.
—Katie Cannon
cientific interest in trauma has fluctuated wildly during the past 150
years. Charcot’ s death in 1893 and Freud’ s shift in emphasis to inner
conflicts, defenses, and instincts at the root of mental suf fering were just
part of mainstream medicine’ s overall loss of interest in the subject.
Psychoanalysis rapidly gained in popularity . In 191 1 the Boston psychiatrist
Morton Prince, who had studied with W illiam James and Pierre Janet,
complained that those interested in the ef fects of trauma were like “clams
swamped by the rising tide in Boston Harbor .”
This neglect lasted for only a few years, though, because the outbreak
of W orld W ar in 1914 once again confronted medicine and psychology with
hundreds of thousands of men with bizarre psychological symptoms,
unexplained medical conditions, and memory loss. The new technology of
motion pictures made it possible to film these soldiers, and today on
Y ouT ube we can observe their bizarre physical postures, strange verbal
utterances, terrified facial expressions, and tics—the physical, embodied
expression of trauma: “a memory that is inscribed simultaneously in the
mind, as interior images and words, and on the body .”1Early in the war the British created the diagnosis of “shell shock,”
which entitled combat veterans to treatment and a disability pension. The
alternative, similar , diagnosis was “neurasthenia,” for which they received
neither treatment nor a pension. It was up to the orientation of the treating
physician which diagnosis a soldier received.2
More than a million British soldiers served on the W estern Front at any
one time. In the first few hours of July 1, 1916 alone, in the Battle of the
Somme, the British army suf fered 57,470 casualties, including 19,240 dead,
the bloodiest day in its history . The historian John Keegan says of their
commander , Field Marshal Douglas Haig, whose statue today dominates
Whitehall in London, once the center of the British Empire: “In his public
manner and private diaries no concern for human suf fering was or is
discernible.” At the Somme “he had sent the flower of British youth to
death or mutilation.”3
As the war wore on, shell shock increasingly compromised the
ef ficiency of the fighting forces. Caught between taking the suf fering of
their soldiers seriously and pursuing victory over the Germans, the British
General Staf f issued General Routine Order Number 2384 in June of 1917,
which stated, “In no circumstances whatever will the expression ‘shell
shock’ be used verbally or be recorded in any regimental or other casualty
report, or any hospital or other medical document.” All soldiers with
psychiatric problems were to be given a single diagnosis of “NYDN” (Not
Y et Diagnosed, Nervous).4 In November 1917 the General Staf f denied
Charles Samuel Myers, who ran four field hospitals for wounded soldiers,
permission to submit a paper on shell shock to the British Medical Journal .
The Germans were even more punitive and treated shell shock as a
character defect, which they managed with a variety of painful treatments,
including electroshock.
In 1922 the British government issued the Southborough Report, whose
goal was to prevent the diagnosis of shell shock in any future wars and to
undermine any more claims for compensation. It suggested the elimination
of shell shock from all of ficial nomenclature and insisted that these cases
should no more be classified “as a battle casualty than sickness or disease is
so regarded.”5 The of ficial view was that well-trained troops, properly led,
would not suf fer from shell shock and that the servicemen who hadsuccumbed to the disorder were undisciplined and unwilling soldiers. While
the political storm about the legitimacy of shell shock continued to rage for
several more years, reports on how to best treat these cases disappeared
from the scientific literature.6
In the United States the fate of veterans was also fraught with
problems. In 1918, when they returned home from the battlefields of France
and Flanders, they had been welcomed as national heroes, just as the
soldiers returning from Iraq and Afghanistan are today . In 1924 Congress
voted to award them a bonus of $1.25 for each day they had served
overseas, but disbursement was postponed until 1945.
By 1932 the nation was in the middle of the Great Depression, and in
May of that year about fifteen thousand unemployed and penniless veterans
camped on the Mall in W ashington DC to petition for immediate payment
of their bonuses. The Senate defeated the bill to move up disbursement by a
vote of sixty-two to eighteen. A month later President Hoover ordered the
army to clear out the veterans’ encampment. Army chief of staf f General
Douglas MacArthur commanded the troops, supported by six tanks. Major
Dwight D. Eisenhower was the liaison with the W ashington police, and
Major Geor ge Patton was in char ge of the cavalry . Soldiers with fixed
bayonets char ged, hurling tear gas into the crowd of veterans. The next
morning the Mall was deserted and the camp was in flames.7 The veterans
never received their pensions.
While politics and medicine turned their backs on the returning
soldiers, the horrors of the war were memorialized in literature and art. In
All Quiet on the W estern Fr ont,8 a novel about the war experiences of
frontline soldiers by the German writer Erich Maria Remarque, the book’ s
protagonist, Paul Bäumer , spoke for an entire generation: “I am aware that
I, without realizing it, have lost my feelings—I don’ t belong here anymore,
I live in an alien world. I prefer to be left alone, not disturbed by anybody .
They talk too much—I can’ t relate to them—they are only busy with
superficial things.”9 Published in 1929, the novel instantly became an
international best seller , with translations in twenty-five languages. The
1930 Hollywood film version won the Academy A ward for Best Picture.
But when Hitler came to power a few years later , All Quiet on the
W estern Fr ont  was one of the first “degenerate” books the Nazis burned inthe public square in front of Humboldt University in Berlin.10 Apparently
awareness of the devastating ef fects of war on soldiers’ minds would have
constituted a threat to the Nazis’ plunge into another round of insanity .
Denial of the consequences of trauma can wreak havoc with the social
fabric of society . The refusal to face the damage caused by the war and the
intolerance of “weakness” played an important role in the rise of fascism
and militarism around the world in the 1930s. The extortionate war
reparations of the T reaty of V ersailles further humiliated an already
disgraced Germany . German society , in turn, dealt ruthlessly with its own
traumatized war veterans, who were treated as inferior creatures. This
cascade of humiliations of the powerless set the stage for the ultimate
debasement of human rights under the Nazi regime: the moral justification
for the strong to vanquish the inferior—the rationale for the ensuing war .
THE NEW F ACE OF TRAUMA
The outbreak of W orld W ar II prompted Charles Samuel Myers and the
American psychiatrist Abram Kardiner to publish the accounts of their
work with W orld W ar I soldiers and veterans. Shell Shock in France 1914–
1918 (1940)1 1 and The  T raumatic Neur oses of W ar  (1941)12 served as the
principal guides for psychiatrists who were treating soldiers in the new
conflict who had “war neuroses.” The U.S. war ef fort was prodigious, and
the advances in frontline psychiatry reflected that commitment. Again,
Y ouT ube of fers a direct window on the past: Hollywood director John
Huston’ s documentary Let Ther e Be Light  (1946) shows the predominant
treatment for war neuroses at that time: hypnosis.13
In Huston’ s film, made while he was serving in the Army Signal Corps,
the doctors are still patriarchal and the patients are still terrified young men.
But they manifest their trauma dif ferently: While the W orld W ar I soldiers
flail, have facial tics, and collapse with paralyzed bodies, the following
generation talks and cringes. Their bodies still keep the score: Their
stomachs are upset, their hearts race, and they are overwhelmed by panic.
But the trauma did not just af fect their bodies. The trance state induced by
hypnosis allowed them to find words for the things they had been too afraid
to remember: their terror , their survivor ’ s guilt, and their conflictingloyalties. It also struck me that these soldiers seemed to keep a much tighter
lid on their anger and hostility than the younger veterans I’d worked with.
Culture shapes the expression of traumatic stress.
The feminist theorist Germaine Greer wrote about the treatment of her
father ’ s PTSD after W orld W ar II: “When [the medical of ficers] examined
men exhibiting severe disturbances they almost invariably found the root
cause in pre-war experience: the sick men were not first-grade fighting
material. . . . The military proposition is [that it is] not war which makes
men sick, but that sick men can not fight wars.”14 It seems unlikely the
doctors did her father any good, but Greer ’ s ef forts to come to grips with
his suf fering undoubtedly helped fuel her exploration of sexual domination
in all its ugly manifestations of rape, incest, and domestic violence.
When I worked at the V A, I was puzzled that the vast majority of the
patients we saw on the psychiatry service were young, recently dischar ged
V ietnam veterans, while the corridors and elevators that led to the medical
departments were filled by old men. Curious about this disparity , I
conducted a survey of the W orld W ar II veterans in the medical clinics in
1983. The vast majority of them scored positive for PTSD on the rating
scales that I administered, but their treatment focused on medical rather
than psychiatric complaints. These vets communicated their distress via
stomach cramps and chest pains rather than with nightmares and rage, from
which, my research showed, they also suf fered. Doctors shape how their
patients communicate their distress: When a patient complains about
terrifying nightmares and his doctor orders a chest X-ray , the patient
realizes that he’ll get better care if he focuses on his physical problems.
Like my relatives who fought in or were captured during W orld W ar II,
most of these men were extremely reluctant to share their experiences. My
sense was that neither the doctors nor their patients wanted to revisit the
war .
However , military and civilian leaders came away from W orld W ar II
with important lessons that the previous generation had failed to grasp.
After the defeat of Nazi Germany and imperial Japan, the United States
helped rebuild Europe by means of the Marshall Plan, which formed the
economic foundation of the next fifty years of relative peace. At home, the
GI Bill provided millions of veterans with educations and home mortgages,which promoted general economic well-being and created a broad-based,
well-educated middle class. The armed forces led the nation in racial
integration and opportunity . The V eterans Administration built facilities
nationwide to help combat veterans with their health care. Still, with all this
thoughtful attention to the returning veterans, the psychological scars of war
went unrecognized, and traumatic neuroses disappeared entirely from
of ficial psychiatric nomenclature. The last scientific writing on combat
trauma after W orld W ar II appeared in 1947.15
TRAUMA REDISCOVERED
As I noted earlier , when I started to work with V ietnam veterans, there was
not a single book on war trauma in the library of the V A, but the V ietnam
W ar inspired numerous studies, the formation of scholarly or ganizations,
and the inclusion of a trauma diagnosis, PTSD, in the professional
literature. At the same time, interest in trauma was exploding in the general
public.
In 1974 Freedman and Kaplan’ s Compr ehensive T extbook of Psychiatry
stated that “incest is extremely rare, and does not occur in more than 1 out
of 1.1 million people.”16 As we have seen in chapter 2 this authoritative
textbook then went on to extol the possible benefits of incest: “Such
incestuous activity diminishes the subject’ s chance of psychosis and allows
for a better adjustment to the external world. . . . The vast majority of them
were none the worse for the experience.”
How misguided those statements were became obvious when the
ascendant feminist movement, combined with awareness of trauma in
returning combat veterans, emboldened tens of thousands of survivors of
childhood sexual abuse, domestic abuse, and rape to come forward.
Consciousness-raising groups and survivor groups were formed, and
numerous popular books, including The Courage to Heal  (1988), a best-
selling self-help book for survivors of incest, and Judith Herman’ s book
T rauma and Recovery (1992), discussed the stages of treatment and
recovery in great detail.
Cautioned by history , I began to wonder if we were headed toward
another backlash like those of 1895, 1917, and 1947 against acknowledgingthe reality of trauma. That proved to be the case, for by the early 1990s
articles had started to appear in many leading newspapers and magazines in
United States and in Europe about a so-called False Memory Syndrome in
which psychiatric patients supposedly manufactured elaborate false
memories of sexual abuse, which they then claimed had lain dormant for
many years before being recovered.
What was striking about these articles was the certainty with which
they stated that there was no evidence that people remember trauma any
dif ferently than they do ordinary events. I vividly recall a phone call from a
well-known newsweekly in London, telling me that they planned to publish
an article about traumatic memory in their next issue and asking me
whether I had any comments on the subject. I was quite enthusiastic about
their question and told them that memory loss for traumatic events had first
been studied in England well over a century earlier . I mentioned John Eric
Erichsen and Frederic Myers’ s work on railway accidents in the 1860s and
1870s and Charles Samuel Myers’ s and W . H. R. Rivers’ s extensive studies
of memory problems in combat soldiers of W orld W ar I. I also suggested
they look at an article published in The Lancet  in 1944, which described the
aftermath of the rescue of the entire British army from the beaches of
Dunkirk in 1940. More than 10 percent of the soldiers who were studied
had suf fered from major memory loss after the evacuation.17 The following
week, the magazine  told its readers that there was no evidence whatsoever
that people sometimes lose some or all memory for traumatic events.
The issue of delayed recall of trauma was not particularly controversial
when Myers and Kardiner first described this phenomenon in their books on
combat neuroses in W orld W ar I; when major memory loss was observed
after the evacuation from Dunkirk; or when I wrote about V ietnam veterans
and the survivor of the Cocoanut Grove nightclub fire. However , during the
1980s and early 1990s, as similar memory problems began to be
documented in women and children in the context of domestic abuse, the
ef forts of abuse victims to seek justice against their alleged perpetrators
moved the issue from science into politics and law . This, in turn, became
the context for the pedophile scandals in the Catholic Church, in which
memory experts were pitted against one another in courtrooms across the
United States and later in Europe and Australia.Experts testifying on behalf of the Church claimed that memories of
childhood sexual abuse were unreliable at best and that the claims being
made by alleged victims more likely resulted from false memories
implanted in their minds by therapists who were oversympathetic,
credulous, or driven by their own agendas. During this period I examined
more than fifty adults who, like Julian, remembered having been abused by
priests. Their claims were denied in about half the cases.
THE SCIENCE OF REPRESSED MEMOR Y
There have in fact been hundreds of scientific publications spanning well
over a century documenting how the memory of trauma can be repressed,
only to resurface years or decades later .18 Memory loss has been reported in
people who have experienced natural disasters, accidents, war trauma,
kidnapping, torture, concentration camps, and physical and sexual abuse.
T otal memory loss is most common in childhood sexual abuse, with
incidence ranging from 19 percent to 38 percent.19 This issue is not
particularly controversial: As early as 1980 the DSM-III recognized the
existence of memory loss for traumatic events in the diagnostic criteria for
dissociative amnesia: “an inability to recall important personal information,
usually of a traumatic or stressful nature, that is too extensive to be
explained by normal for getfulness.”  Memory loss has been part of the
criteria for PTSD since that diagnosis was first introduced.
One of the most interesting studies of repressed memory was conducted
by Dr . Linda Meyer W illiams, which began when she was a graduate
student in sociology  at the University of Pennsylvania in the early 1970s.
W illiams interviewed 206 girls between the ages of ten and twelve who had
been admitted to a hospital emer gency room following sexual abuse. Their
laboratory tests, as well as the interviews with the children and their
parents, were kept in the hospital’ s medical records. Seventeen years later
W illiams was able to track down 136 of the children, now adults, with
whom she conducted extensive follow-up interviews.20 More than a third of
the women (38 percent) did not recall the abuse that was documented in
their medical records, while only fifteen women (12 percent) said that they
had never been abused as children. More than two-thirds (68 percent)reported other incidents of childhood sexual abuse. W omen who were
younger at the time of the incident and those who were molested by
someone they knew were more likely to have for gotten their abuse.
This study also examined the reliability of recovered memories. One in
ten women (16 percent of those who recalled the abuse) reported that they
had for gotten it at some time in the past but later remembered that it had
happened. In comparison with the women who had always remembered
their molestation, those with a prior period of for getting were younger at the
time of their abuse and were less likely to have received support from their
mothers. W illiams also determined that the recovered memories were
approximately as accurate as those that had never been lost: All the
women’ s memories were accurate for the central facts of the incident, but
none of their stories precisely matched every detail documented in their
charts.21
W illiams’ s findings are supported by recent neuroscience research that
shows that memories that are retrieved tend to return to the memory bank
with modifications.22 As long as a memory is inaccessible, the mind is
unable to change it. But as soon as a story starts being told, particularly if it
is told repeatedly , it changes—the act of telling itself changes the tale. The
mind cannot help but make meaning out of what it knows, and the meaning
we make of our lives changes how and what we remember .
Given the wealth of evidence that trauma can be for gotten and
resurface years later , why did nearly one hundred reputable memory
scientists from several dif ferent countries throw the weight of their
reputations behind the appeal to overturn Father Shanley’ s conviction,
claiming that “repressed memories” were based on “junk science”? Because
memory loss and delayed recall of traumatic experiences had never been
documented in the laboratory , some cognitive scientists adamantly denied
that these phenomena existed23 or that retrieved traumatic memories could
be accurate.24 However , what doctors encounter in emer gency rooms, on
psychiatric wards, and on the battlefield is necessarily quite dif ferent from
what scientists observe in their safe and well-or ganized laboratories.
Consider what is known as the “lost in the mall” experiment, for
example. Academic researchers have shown that it is relatively easy to
implant memories of events that never took place, such as having been lostin a shopping mall as a child.25 About 25 percent of subjects in these
studies later “recall” that they were frightened and even fill in missing
details. But such recollections involve none of the visceral terror that a lost
child would actually experience.
Another line of research documented the unreliability of eyewitness
testimony . Subjects might be shown a video of a car driving down a street
and asked afterward if they saw a stop sign or a traf fic light; children might
be asked to recall what a male visitor to their classroom had been wearing.
Other eyewitness experiments demonstrated that the questions witnesses
were asked could alter what they claimed to remember . These studies were
valuable in bringing many police and courtroom practices into question, but
they have little relevance to traumatic memory .
The fundamental problem is this: Events that take place in the
laboratory cannot be considered equivalent to the conditions under which
traumatic memories are created. The terror and helplessness associated with
PTSD simply can’ t be induced de novo  in such a setting. W e can study the
ef fects of existing traumas in the lab, as in our script-driven imaging studies
of flashbacks, but the original imprint of trauma cannot be laid down there.
Dr . Roger Pitman conducted a study at Harvard in which he showed college
students a film called Faces of Death , which contained newsreel footage of
violent deaths and executions. This movie, now widely banned, is as
extreme as any institutional review board would allow , but it did not cause
Pitman’ s normal volunteers to develop symptoms of PTSD. If you want to
study traumatic memory , you have to study the memories of people who
have actually been traumatized.
Interestingly , once the excitement and profitability of courtroom
testimony  diminished, the “scientific” controversy disappeared as well,  and
clinicians were left to deal with the wreckage of traumatic memory .
NORMAL VERSUS TRAUMA TIC MEMOR Y
In 1994 I and my colleagues at Massachusetts General Hospital decided to
undertake a systematic study comparing how people recall benign
experiences and horrific ones. W e placed advertisements in local
newspapers, in laundromats, and on student union bulletin boards that said:“Has something terrible happened to you that you cannot get out of your
mind? Call 727-5500; we will pay you $10.00 for participating in this
study .” In response to our first ad seventy-six volunteers showed up.26
After we introduced ourselves, we started of f by asking each
participant: “Can you tell us about an event in your life that you think you
will always remember but that is not traumatic?” One participant lit up and
said, “The day that my daughter was born”; others mentioned their wedding
day , playing on a winning sports team, or being valedictorian at their high
school graduation. Then we asked them to focus on specific sensory details
of those events, such as: “Are you ever somewhere and suddenly have a
vivid image of what your husband looked like on your wedding day?” The
answers were always negative. “How about what your husband’ s body felt
like on your wedding night?” (W e got some odd looks on that one.) W e
continued: “Do you ever have a vivid, precise recollection of the speech
you gave as a valedictorian?” “Do you ever have intense sensations
recalling the birth of your first child?” The replies were all in the negative.
Then we asked them about the traumas that had brought them into the
study—many of them rapes. “Do you ever suddenly remember how your
rapist smelled?” we asked, and, “Do you ever experience the same physical
sensations you had when you were raped?” Such questions precipitated
powerful emotional responses: “That is why I cannot go to parties anymore,
because the smell of alcohol on somebody’ s breath makes me feel like I am
being raped all over again” or “I can no longer make love to my husband,
because when he touches me in a particular way I feel like I am being raped
again.”
There were two major dif ferences between how people talked about
memories of positive versus traumatic experiences: (1) how the memories
were or ganized, and (2) their physical reactions to them. W eddings, births,
and graduations were recalled as events from the past, stories with a
beginning, a middle, and an end. Nobody said that there were periods when
they’d completely for gotten any of these events.
In contrast, the traumatic memories were disor ganized. Our subjects
remembered some details all too clearly (the smell of the rapist, the gash in
the forehead of a dead child) but could not recall the sequence of events orother vital details (the first person who arrived to help, whether an
ambulance or a police car took them to the hospital).
W e also asked the participants how they recalled their trauma at three
points in time: right after it happened; when they were most troubled by
their symptoms; and during the week before the study .  All of our
traumatized participants said that they had not been able to tell anybody
precisely what had happened immediately following the event. (This will
not surprise anyone who has worked in an emer gency room or ambulance
service: People brought in after a car accident in which a child or a friend
has been killed sit in stunned silence, dumbfounded by terror .) Almost all
had repeated flashbacks: They felt overwhelmed by images, sounds,
sensations, and emotions. As time went on, even more sensory details and
feelings were activated, but most participants also started to be able to make
some sense out of them. They began to “know” what had happened and to
be able to tell the story to other people, a story that we call “the memory of
the trauma.”
Gradually the images and flashbacks decreased in frequency , but the
greatest improvement was in the participants’ ability to piece together the
details and sequence of the event. By the time of our study , 85 percent of
them were able to tell a coherent story , with a beginning, a middle, and an
end. Only a few were missing significant details. W e noted that the five
who said they had been abused as children had the most fragmented
narratives—their memories still arrived as images, physical sensations, and
intense emotions.
In essence, our study confirmed the dual memory system that Janet and
his colleagues at the Salpêtrière had described more than a hundred years
earlier: T raumatic memories are fundamentally dif ferent from the stories we
tell about the past. They are dissociated: The dif ferent sensations that
entered the brain at the time of the trauma are not properly assembled into a
story , a piece of autobiography .
Perhaps the most important finding in our study was that remembering
the trauma with all its associated af fects, does not, as Breuer and Freud
claimed back in 1893, necessarily resolve it. Our research did not support
the idea that language can substitute for action. Most of our study
participants could tell a coherent story and also experience the pain
associated with those stories, but they kept being haunted by unbearableimages and physical sensations. Research in contemporary exposure
treatment, a staple of cognitive behavioral therapy , has similarly
disappointing results: The majority of patients treated with that method
continue to have serious PTSD symptoms three months after the end of
treatment.27 As we will see, finding words to describe what has happened to
you can be transformative, but it does not always abolish flashbacks or
improve concentration, stimulate vital involvement in your life or reduce
hypersensitivity to disappointments and perceived injuries.
LISTENING T O SUR VIV ORS
Nobody wants to remember trauma. In that regard society is no dif ferent
from the victims themselves. W e all want to live in a world that is safe,
manageable, and predictable, and victims remind us that this is not always
the case. In order to understand trauma, we have to overcome our natural
reluctance to confront that reality and cultivate the courage to listen to the
testimonies of survivors.
In his book Holocaust T estimonies: The Ruins of Memory  (1991),
Lawrence Langer writes about his work in the Fortunof f V ideo Archive at
Y ale University: “Listening to accounts of Holocaust experience, we
unearth a mosaic of evidence that constantly vanishes into bottomless layers
of incompletion.28 W e wrestle with the beginnings of a permanently
unfinished tale, full of incomplete intervals, faced by the spectacle of a
faltering witness often reduced to a distressed silence by the overwhelming
solicitations of deep memory .” As one of his witnesses says: “If you were
not there, it’ s dif ficult to describe and say how it was. How men function
under such stress is one thing, and then how you communicate and express
that to somebody who never knew that such a degree of brutality exists
seems like a fantasy .”
Another survivor , Charlotte Delbo, describes her dual existence after
Auschwitz: “[T]he ‘self ’ who was in the camp isn’ t me, isn’ t the person
who is here, opposite you. No, it’ s too unbelievable. And everything that
happened to this other ‘self,’ the one from Auschwitz, doesn’ t touch me
now , me , doesn’ t concern me, so distinct are deep memory and common
memory . . . . W ithout this split, I wouldn’ t have been able to come back tolife.”29 She comments that even words have a dual meaning: “Otherwise,
someone [in the camps] who has been tormented by thirst for weeks would
never again be able to say: ‘I’m thirsty . Let’ s make a cup of tea.’ Thirst
[after the war] has once more become a currently used term. On the other
hand, if I dream of the thirst I felt in Birkenau [the extermination facilities
in Auschwitz], I see myself as I was then, haggard, bereft of reason,
tottering.”30
Langer hauntingly concludes, “Who can find a proper grave for such
damaged mosaics of the mind, where they may rest in pieces? Life goes on,
but in two temporal directions at once, the future unable to escape the grip
of a memory laden with grief.”31
The essence of trauma is that it is overwhelming, unbelievable, and
unbearable. Each patient demands that we suspend our sense of what is
normal and accept that we are dealing with a dual reality: the reality of a
relatively secure and predictable present that lives side by side with a
ruinous, ever -present past.
NANCY’S ST OR Y
Few patients have put that duality into words as vividly as Nancy , the
director of nursing in a Midwestern hospital who came to Boston several
times to consult with me. Shortly after the birth of her third child, Nancy
underwent what is usually routine outpatient sur gery , a laparoscopic tubal
ligation in which the fallopian tubes are cauterized to prevent future
pregnancies. However , because she was given insuf ficient anesthesia, she
awakened after the operation began and remained aware nearly to the end,
at times falling into what she called “a light sleep” or “dream,” at times
experiencing the full horror of her situation. She was unable to alert the OR
team by moving or crying out because she had been given a standard
muscle relaxant to prevent muscle contractions during sur gery .
Some degree of “anesthesia awareness” is now estimated to occur in
approximately thirty thousand sur gical patients in the United States every
year ,32 and I had previously testified on behalf of several people who were
traumatized by the experience. Nancy , however , did not want to sue her
sur geon or anesthetist. Her entire focus was on bringing the reality of hertrauma to consciousness so that she could free herself from its intrusions
into her everyday life. I’d like to end this chapter by sharing several
passages from a remarkable series of e-mails in which she described her
grueling journey to recovery .
Initially Nancy did not know what had happened to her . “When we
went home I was still in a daze, doing the typical things of running a
household, yet not really feeling that I was alive or that I was real. I had
trouble sleeping that night. For days, I remained in my own little
disconnected world. I could not use a hair dryer , toaster , stove or anything
that warmed up. I could not concentrate on what people were doing or
telling me. I just didn’ t care. I was increasingly anxious. I slept less and
less. I knew I was behaving strangely and kept trying to understand what
was frightening me so.
“On the fourth night after the sur gery , around 3 AM, I started to realize
that the dream I had been living all this time related to conversations I had
heard in the operating room. I was suddenly transported back into the OR
and could feel my paralyzed body being burned. I was engulfed in a world
of terror and horror .” From then on, Nancy says, memories and flashbacks
erupted into her life.
“It was as if the door was pushed open slightly , allowing the intrusion.
There was a mixture of curiosity and avoidance. I continued to have
irrational fears. I was deathly afraid of sleep; I experienced a sense of terror
when seeing the color blue. My husband, unfortunately , was bearing the
brunt of my illness. I would lash out at him when I truly did not intend to. I
was sleeping at most 2 to 3 hours, and my daytime was filled with hours of
flashbacks. I remained chronically hyperalert, feeling threatened by my own
thoughts and wanting to escape them. I lost 23 pounds in 3 weeks. People
kept commenting on how great I looked.
“I began to think about dying. I developed a very distorted view of my
life in which all my successes diminished and old failures were amplified. I
was hurting my husband and found that I could not protect my children
from my rage.
“Three weeks after the sur gery I went back to work at the hospital. The
first time I saw somebody in a sur gical scrubsuit was in the elevator . I
wanted to get out immediately , but of course I could not. I then had this
irrational ur ge to clobber him, which I contained with considerable ef fort.This episode triggered increasing flashbacks, terror and dissociation. I cried
all the way home from work. After that, I became adept at avoidance. I
never set foot in an elevator , I never went to the cafeteria, I avoided the
sur gical floors.”
Gradually Nancy was able to piece together her flashbacks and create
an understandable, if horrifying, memory of her sur gery . She recalled the
reassurances of the OR nurses and a brief period of sleep after the
anesthesia was started. Then she remembered how she began to awaken.
“The entire team was laughing about an af fair one of the nurses was
having. This coincided with the first sur gical incision. I felt the stab of the
scalpel, then the cutting, then the warm blood flowing over my skin. I tried
desperately to move, to speak, but my body didn’ t work. I couldn’ t
understand this.  I felt a deeper pain as the layers of muscle pulled apart
under their own tension. I knew I wasn’ t supposed to feel this.”
Nancy next recalls someone “rummaging around” in her belly and
identified this as the laparoscopic instruments being placed. She felt her left
tube being clamped. “Then suddenly there was an intense searing, burning
pain. I tried to escape, but the cautery tip pursued me, relentlessly burning
through. There simply are no words to describe the terror of this experience.
This pain was not in the same realm as other pain I had known and
conquered, like a broken bone or natural childbirth. It begins as extreme
pain, then continues relentlessly as it slowly burns through the tube. The
pain of being cut with the scalpel pales beside this giant.”
“Then, abruptly , the right tube felt the initial impact of the burning tip.
When I heard them laugh, I briefly lost track of where I was. I believed I
was in a torture chamber , and I could not understand why they were
torturing me without even asking for information. . . . My world narrowed
to a small sphere around the operating table. There was no sense of time, no
past, and no future. There was only pain, terror , and horror . I felt isolated
from all humanity , profoundly alone in spite of the people surrounding me.
The sphere was closing in on me.
“In my agony , I must have made some movement. I heard the nurse
anesthetist tell the anesthesiologist that I was ‘light.’ He ordered more meds
and then quietly said, ‘There is no need to put any of this in the chart.’ That
is the last memory I recalled.”In her later e-mails to me, Nancy struggled to capture the existential
reality of trauma.
“I want to tell you what a flashback is like. It is as if time is folded or
warped, so that the past and present mer ge,  as if I were physically
transported into the past. Symbols related to the original trauma, however
benign in reality , are thoroughly contaminated and so become objects to be
hated, feared, destroyed if possible, avoided if not. For example, an iron in
any form—a toy , a clothes iron, a curling iron, came to be seen as an
instrument of torture. Each encounter with a scrub suit left me
disassociated, confused, physically ill and at times consciously angry .
“My marriage is slowly falling apart—my husband came to represent
the heartless laughing people [the sur gical team] who hurt me. I exist in a
dual state. A pervasive numbness covers me with a blanket; and yet the
touch of a small child pulls me back to the world. For a moment, I am
present and a part of life, not just an observer .
“Interestingly , I function very well at work, and I am constantly given
positive feedback. Life proceeds with its own sense of falsity .
“There is a strangeness, bizarreness to this dual existence. I tire of it.
Y et I cannot give up on life, and I cannot delude myself into believing that
if I ignore the beast it will go away . I’ve thought many times that I had
recalled all the events around the sur gery , only to find a new one.
“There are so many pieces of that 45 minutes of my life that remain
unknown. My memories are still incomplete and fragmented, but I no
longer think that I need to know everything in order to understand what
happened.
“When the fear subsides I realize I can handle it, but a part of me
doubts that I can. The pull to the past is strong; it is the dark side of my life;
and I must dwell there from time to time. The struggle may also be a way to
know that I survive—a re-playing of the fight to survive—which apparently
I won, but cannot own.”
An early sign of recovery came when Nancy needed another , more
extensive operation. She chose a Boston hospital for the sur gery , asked for a
preoperative meeting with the sur geons and the anesthesiologist specifically
to discuss her prior experience, and requested that I be allowed to join them
in the operating room. For the first time in many years I put on a sur gicalscrub suit and accompanied her into the OR while the anesthesia was
induced. This time she woke up to a feeling of safety .
T wo years later I wrote Nancy asking her permission to use her account
of anesthesia awareness in this chapter . In her reply she updated me on the
progress of her recovery: “I wish I could say that the sur gery to which you
were so kind to accompany me ended my suf fering. That sadly was not the
case. After about six more months I made two choices that proved
provident. I left my CBT therapist to work with a psychodynamic
psychiatrist and I joined a Pilates class.
“In our last month of therapy , I asked my psychiatrist why he did not
try to fix me as all other therapists had attempted, yet had failed. He told me
that he assumed, given what I had be able to accomplish with my children
and career , that I had suf ficient resiliency to heal myself, if he created a
holding environment for me to do so. This was an hour each week that
became a refuge where I could unravel the mystery of how I had become so
damaged and then re-construct a sense of myself that was whole, not
fragmented, peaceful, not tormented. Through Pilates, I found a stronger
physical core, as well as a community of women who willingly gave
acceptance and social support that had been distant in my life since the
trauma. This combination of core strengthening—psychological, social, and
physical—created a sense of personal safety and mastery , relegating my
memories to the distant past, allowing the present and future to emer ge.”P AR T FIVE
P A THS T O
RECOVER YNC H A P T E R  1 3
H E A L I N G  F R O M  T R A U M A :  O W N I N G
Y O U R  S E L F
I don’ t go to therapy to find out if I’m a freak
I go and I find the one and only answer every week
And when I talk about therapy , I know what people think
That it only makes you selfish and in love with your shrink
But, oh how I loved everybody else
When I finally got to talk so much about myself
—Dar W illiams, What Do Y ou Hear in These Sounds
obody can “treat” a war , or abuse, rape, molestation, or any other
horrendous event, for that matter; what has happened cannot be
undone. But what can  be dealt with are the imprints of the trauma on body ,
mind, and soul: the crushing sensations in your chest that you may label as
anxiety or depression; the fear of losing control; always being on alert for
danger or rejection; the self-loathing; the nightmares and flashbacks; the
fog that keeps you from staying on task and from engaging fully in what
you are doing; being unable to fully open your heart to another human
being.
T rauma robs you of the feeling that you are in char ge of yourself, of
what I will call self-leadership in the chapters to come.1 The challenge of
recovery is to reestablish ownership of your body and your mind—of your
self. This means feeling free to know what you know and to feel what youfeel without becoming overwhelmed, enraged, ashamed, or collapsed. For
most people this involves (1) finding a way to become calm and focused,
(2) learning to maintain that calm in response to images, thoughts, sounds,
or physical sensations that remind you of the past, (3) finding a way to be
fully alive in the present and engaged with the people around you, (4) not
having to keep secrets from yourself, including secrets about the ways that
you have managed to survive.
These goals are not steps to be achieved, one by one, in some fixed
sequence. They overlap, and some may be more dif ficult than others,
depending on individual circumstances. In each of the chapters that follow ,
I’ll talk about specific methods or approaches to accomplish them. I have
tried to make these chapters useful both to trauma survivors and to the
therapists who are treating them. People under temporary stress may also
find them useful. I’ve used every one of these methods extensively to treat
my patients, and I have also experienced them myself. Some people get
better using just one of these methods, but most are helped by dif ferent
approaches at dif ferent stages of their recovery .
I have done scientific studies of many of the treatments I describe here
and have published the research findings in peer -reviewed scientific
journals.2 My aim in this chapter is to provide an overview of underlying
principles, a preview of what’ s to come, and some brief comments on
methods I don’ t cover in depth later on.
A NEW FOCUS FOR RECOVER Y
When we talk about trauma, we often start with a story or a question: “What
happened during the war?” “W ere you ever molested?” “Let me tell you
about that accident or that rape,” or “W as anybody in your family a problem
drinker?” However , trauma is much more than a story about something that
happened long ago. The emotions and physical sensations that were
imprinted during the trauma are experienced not as memories but as
disruptive physical reactions in the present.
In order to regain control over your self, you need to revisit the trauma:
Sooner or later you need to confront what has happened to you, but only
after you feel safe and will not be retraumatized by it. The first order ofbusiness is to find ways to cope with feeling overwhelmed by the sensations
and emotions associated with the past.
As the previous parts of this book have shown, the engines of
posttraumatic reactions are located in the emotional brain. In contrast with
the rational brain, which expresses itself in thoughts, the emotional brain
manifests itself in physical reactions: gut-wrenching sensations, heart
pounding, breathing becoming fast and shallow , feelings of heartbreak,
speaking with an uptight and reedy voice, and the characteristic body
movements that signify collapse, rigidity , rage, or defensiveness.
Why can’ t we just be reasonable? And can understanding help? The
rational, executive brain is good at helping us understand where feelings
come from (as in: “I get scared when I get close to a guy because my father
molested me” or “I have trouble expressing my love toward my son because
I feel guilty about having killed a child in Iraq”). However , the rational
brain cannot abolish emotions, sensations, or thoughts (such as living with a
low-level sense of threat or feeling that you are fundamentally a terrible
person, even though you rationally know that you are not to blame for
having been raped). Understanding why  you feel a certain way does not
change how  you feel. But it can keep you from surrendering to intense
reactions (for example, assaulting a boss who reminds you of a perpetrator ,
breaking up with a lover at your first disagreement, or jumping into the
arms of a stranger). However , the more frazzled we are, the more our
rational brains take a backseat to our emotions.3
LIMBIC SYSTEM THERAPY
The fundamental issue in resolving traumatic stress is to restore the proper
balance between the rational and emotional brains, so that you can feel in
char ge of how you respond and how you conduct your life. When we’re
triggered into states of hyper - or hypoarousal, we are pushed outside our
“window of tolerance”—the range of optimal functioning.4 W e become
reactive and disor ganized; our filters stop working—sounds and lights
bother us, unwanted images from the past intrude on our minds, and we
panic or fly into rages. If we’re shut down, we feel numb in body and mind;our thinking becomes sluggish and we have trouble getting out of our
chairs.
As long as people are either hyperaroused or shut down, they cannot
learn from experience. Even if they manage to stay in control, they become
so uptight (Alcoholics Anonymous calls this “white-knuckle sobriety”) that
they are inflexible, stubborn, and depressed. Recovery from trauma
involves the restoration of executive functioning and, with it, self-
confidence and the capacity for playfulness and creativity .
If we want to change posttraumatic reactions, we have to access the
emotional brain and do “limbic system therapy”: repairing faulty alarm
systems and restoring the emotional brain to its ordinary job of being a
quiet background presence that takes care of the housekeeping of the body ,
ensuring that you eat, sleep, connect with intimate partners, protect your
children, and defend against danger .
DRA WING BY LICIA SKY
Accessing the emotional brain.  The rational, analyzing part of the brain, centered on the
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, has no direct connections with the emotional brain, where most
imprints of trauma reside, but the medial prefrontal cortex, the center of self-awareness, does.The neuroscientist Joseph LeDoux and his colleagues have shown that
the only way we can consciously access the emotional brain is through self-
awareness, i.e. by activating the medial prefrontal cortex, the part of the
brain that notices what is going on inside us and thus allows us to feel what
we’re feeling.5 (The technical term for this is “ inter oception” —Latin for
“looking inside.”) Most of our conscious brain is dedicated to focusing on
the outside world: getting along with others and making plans for the future.
However , that does not help us manage ourselves. Neuroscience research
shows that the only way we can change the way we feel is by becoming
aware of our inner  experience and learning to befriend what is going inside
ourselves.
BEFRIENDING THE EMOTIONAL BRAIN
1. DEALING WITH HYPERAROUSAL
Over the past few decades mainstream psychiatry has focused on using
drugs to change the way we feel, and this has become the accepted way to
deal with hyper - and hypoarousal. I will discuss drugs later in this chapter ,
but first I need to stress the fact that we have a host of inbuilt skills to keep
us on an even keel. In chapter 5 we saw how emotions are registered in the
body . Some 80 percent of the fibers of the vagus nerve (which connects the
brain with many internal or gans) are af ferent; that is, they run from the
body into the brain.6 This means that we can directly train our arousal
system by the way we breathe, chant, and move, a principle that has been
utilized since time immemorial in places like China and India, and in every
religious practice that I know of, but that is suspiciously eyed as
“alternative” in mainstream culture.
In research supported by the National Institutes of Health, my
colleagues and I have shown that ten weeks of yoga practice markedly
reduced the PTSD symptoms of patients who had failed to respond to any
medication or to any other treatment.7 (I will discuss yoga in chapter 16.)
Neurofeedback, the topic of chapter 19, also can be particularly ef fective
for children and adults who are so hyperaroused or shut down that they
have trouble focusing and prioritizing.8Learning how to breathe calmly and remaining in a state of relative
physical relaxation, even while accessing painful and horrifying memories,
is an essential tool for recovery .9 When you deliberately take a few slow ,
deep breaths, you will notice the ef fects of the parasympathetic brake on
your arousal (as explained in chapter 5). The more you stay focused on your
breathing, the more you will benefit, particularly if you pay attention until
the very end of the out breath and then wait a moment before you inhale
again. As you continue to breathe and notice the air moving in and out of
your lungs you may think about the role that oxygen plays in nourishing
your body and bathing your tissues with the ener gy you need to feel alive
and engaged. Chapter 16 documents the full-body ef fects of this simple
practice.
Since emotional regulation is the critical issue in managing the ef fects
of trauma and neglect, it would make an enormous dif ference if teachers,
army ser geants, foster parents, and mental health professionals were
thoroughly schooled in emotional-regulation techniques. Right now this still
is mainly the domain of preschool and kinder garten teachers, who deal with
immature brains and impulsive behavior on a daily basis and who are often
very adept at managing them.10
Mainstream W estern psychiatric and psychological healing traditions
have paid scant attention to self-management. In contrast to the W estern
reliance on drugs and verbal therapies, other traditions from around the
world rely on mindfulness, movement, rhythms, and action. Y oga in India,
tai chi and qigong in China, and rhythmical drumming throughout Africa
are just a few examples. The cultures of Japan and the Korean peninsula
have spawned martial arts, which focus on the cultivation of purposeful
movement and being centered in the present, abilities that are damaged in
traumatized individuals. Aikido, judo, tae kwon do, kendo, and jujitsu, as
well as capoeira from Brazil, are examples. These techniques all involve
physical movement, breathing, and meditation. Aside from yoga, few of
these popular non-W estern healing traditions have been systematically
studied for the treatment of PTSD.
2. NO MIND WITHOUT MINDFULNESSAt the core of recovery is self-awareness. The most important phrases in
trauma therapy are “Notice that” and “What happens next?” T raumatized
people live with seemingly unbearable sensations: They feel heartbroken
and suf fer from intolerable sensations in the pit of their stomach or tightness
in their chest. Y et avoiding feeling these sensations in our bodies increases
our vulnerability to being overwhelmed by them.
Body awareness puts us in touch with our inner world, the landscape of
our or ganism. Simply noticing our annoyance, nervousness, or anxiety
immediately helps us shift our perspective and opens up new options other
than our automatic, habitual reactions. Mindfulness puts us in touch with
the transitory nature of our feelings and perceptions. When we pay focused
attention to our bodily sensations, we can recognize the ebb and flow of our
emotions and, with that, increase our control over them.
T raumatized people are often afraid of feeling. It is not so much the
perpetrators (who, hopefully , are no longer around to hurt them) but their
own physical sensations that now are the enemy . Apprehension about being
hijacked by uncomfortable sensations keeps the body frozen and the mind
shut. Even though the trauma is a thing of the past, the emotional brain
keeps generating sensations that make the suf ferer feel scared and helpless.
It’ s not surprising that so many trauma survivors are compulsive eaters and
drinkers, fear making love, and avoid many social activities: Their sensory
world is lar gely of f limits.
In order to change you need to open yourself to your inner experience.
The first step is to allow your mind to focus on your sensations and notice
how , in contrast to the timeless, ever -present experience of trauma, physical
sensations are transient and respond to slight shifts in body position,
changes in breathing, and shifts in thinking. Once you pay attention to your
physical sensations, the next step is to label them, as in “When I feel
anxious, I feel a crushing sensation in my chest.” I may then say to a
patient: “Focus on that sensation and see how it changes when you take a
deep breath out, or when you tap your chest just below your collarbone, or
when you allow yourself to cry .” Practicing mindfulness calms down the
sympathetic nervous system, so that you are less likely to be thrown into
fight-or -flight.1 1 Learning to observe and tolerate your physical reactions is
a prerequisite for safely revisiting the past. If you cannot tolerate what youare feeling right now , opening up the past will only compound the misery
and retraumatize you further .12
W e can tolerate a great deal discomfort as long as we stay conscious of
the fact that the body’ s commotions constantly shift. One moment your
chest tightens, but after you take a deep breath and exhale, that feeling
softens and you may observe something else, perhaps a tension in your
shoulder . Now you can start exploring what happens when you take a
deeper breath and notice how your rib cage expands.13 Once you feel
calmer and more curious, you can go back to that sensation in your
shoulder . Y ou should not be surprised if a memory spontaneously arises in
which that shoulder was somehow involved.
A further step is to observe the interplay between your thoughts and
your physical sensations. How are particular thoughts registered in your
body? (Do thoughts like “My father loves me” or “my girlfriend dumped
me” produce dif ferent sensations?) Becoming aware of how your body
or ganizes particular emotions or memories opens up the possibility of
releasing sensations and impulses you once blocked in order to survive.14 In
chapter 20, on the benefits of theater , I’ll describe in more detail how this
works.
Jon Kabat-Zinn, one of the pioneers in mind-body medicine, founded
the Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) program at the University
of Massachusetts Medical Center in 1979, and his method has been
thoroughly studied for more than three decades. As he describes
mindfulness, “One way to think of this process of transformation is to think
of mindfulness as a lens, taking the scattered and reactive ener gies of your
mind and focusing them into a coherent source of ener gy for living, for
problem solving, for healing.”15
Mindfulness has been shown to have a positive ef fect on numerous
psychiatric, psychosomatic, and stress-related symptoms, including
depression and chronic pain.16 It has broad ef fects on physical health,
including improvements in immune response, blood pressure, and cortisol
levels.17 It has also been shown to activate the brain regions involved in
emotional regulation18 and to lead to changes in the regions related to body
awareness and fear .19 Research by my Harvard colleagues Britta Hölzel and
Sara Lazar has shown that practicing mindfulness even decreases theactivity of the brain’ s smoke detector , the amygdala, and thus decreases
reactivity to potential triggers.20
3. RELA TIONSHIPS
Study after study shows that having a good support network constitutes the
single most powerful protection against becoming traumatized. Safety and
terror are incompatible. When we are terrified, nothing calms us down like
the reassuring voice or the firm embrace of someone we trust. Frightened
adults respond to the same comforts as terrified children: gentle holding and
rocking and the assurance that somebody bigger and stronger is taking care
of things, so you can safely go to sleep. In order to recover , mind, body , and
brain need to be convinced that it is safe to let go. That happens only when
you feel safe at a visceral level and allow yourself to connect that sense of
safety with memories of past helplessness.
After an acute trauma, like an assault, accident, or natural disaster ,
survivors require the presence of familiar people, faces, and voices;
physical contact; food; shelter and a safe place; and time to sleep. It is
critical to communicate with loved ones close and far and to reunite as soon
as possible with family and friends in a place that feels safe. Our attachment
bonds are our greatest protection against threat. For example, children who
are separated from their parents after a traumatic event are likely to suf fer
serious negative long-term ef fects. Studies conducted during W orld W ar II
in England showed that children who lived in London during the Blitz and
were sent away to the countryside for protection against German bombing
raids fared much worse than children who remained with their parents and
endured nights in bomb shelters and frightening images of destroyed
buildings and dead people.21
T raumatized human beings recover in the context of relationships: with
families, loved ones, AA meetings, veterans’ or ganizations, religious
communities, or professional therapists. The role of those relationships is to
provide physical and emotional safety , including safety from feeling
shamed, admonished, or judged, and to bolster the courage to tolerate, face,
and process the reality of what has happened.
As we have seen, much the wiring of our brain circuits is devoted to
being in tune with others. Recovery from trauma involves (re)connectingwith our fellow human beings. This is why trauma that has occurred within
relationships is generally more dif ficult to treat than trauma resulting from
traf fic accidents or natural disasters. In our society the most common
traumas in women and children occur at the hands of their parents or
intimate partners. Child abuse, molestation, and domestic violence all are
inflicted by people who are supposed to love you. That knocks out the most
important protection against being traumatized: being sheltered by the
people you love.
If the people whom you naturally turn to for care and protection terrify
or reject you, you learn to shut down and to ignore what you feel.22 As we
saw in part 3, when your caregivers turn on you, you have to find
alternative ways to deal with feeling scared, angry , or frustrated. Managing
your terror all by yourself gives rise to another set of problems:
dissociation, despair , addictions, a chronic sense of panic, and relationships
that are marked by alienation, disconnection, and explosions. Patients with
these histories rarely make the connection between what happened to them
long ago and how they currently feel and behave. Everything just seems
unmanageable.
Relief does not come until they are able to acknowledge what has
happened and recognize the invisible demons they’re struggling with.
Recall, for example, the men I described in chapter 1 1 who had been abused
by pedophile priests. They visited the gym regularly , took anabolic steroids,
and were strong as oxen. However , in our interviews they often acted like
scared kids; the hurt boys deep inside still felt helpless.
While human contact and attunement are the wellspring of
physiological self-regulation, the promise of closeness often evokes fear of
getting hurt, betrayed, and abandoned. Shame plays an important role in
this: “Y ou will find out how rotten and disgusting I am and dump me as
soon as you really get to know me.” Unresolved trauma can take a terrible
toll on relationships. If your heart is still broken because you were assaulted
by someone you loved, you are likely to be preoccupied with not getting
hurt again and fear opening up to someone new . In fact, you may
unwittingly try to hurt them before they have a chance to hurt you.
This poses a real challenge for recovery . Once you recognize that
posttraumatic reactions started of f as ef forts to save your life, you maygather the courage to face your inner music (or cacophony), but you will
need help to do so. Y ou have to find someone you can trust enough to
accompany you, someone who can safely hold your feelings and help you
listen to the painful messages from your emotional brain. Y ou need a guide
who is not afraid of your terror and who can contain your darkest rage,
someone who can safeguard the wholeness of you while you explore the
fragmented experiences that you had to keep secret from yourself for so
long. Most traumatized individuals need an anchor and a great deal of
coaching to do this work.
Choosing a Pr ofessional Therapist
The training of competent trauma therapists involves learning about the
impact of trauma, abuse, and neglect and mastering a variety of techniques
that can help to (1) stabilize and calm patients down, (2) help to lay
traumatic memories and reenactments to rest, and (3) reconnect patients
with their fellow men and women. Ideally the therapist will also have been
on the receiving end of whatever therapy he or she practices.
While it’ s inappropriate and unethical for therapists to tell you the
details of their personal struggles, it is perfectly reasonable to ask what
particular forms of therapy they have been trained in, where they learned
their skills, and whether they’ve personally benefited from the therapy they
propose for you.
There is no one “treatment of choice” for trauma, and any therapist
who believes that his or her particular method is the only answer to your
problems is suspect of being an ideologue rather than somebody who is
interested in making sure that you get well. No therapist can possibly be
familiar with every ef fective treatment, and he or she must be open to your
exploring options other than the ones he or she of fers. He or she also must
be open to learning from you. Gender , race, and personal background are
relevant only if they interfere with helping the patient feel safe and
understood.
Do you feel basically comfortable with this therapist? Does he or she
seem to feel comfortable in his or her own skin and with you as a fellow
human being? Feeling safe is a necessary condition for you to confront your
fears and anxieties. Someone who is stern, judgmental, agitated, or harsh islikely to leave you feeling scared, abandoned, and humiliated, and that
won’ t help you resolve your traumatic stress . There may be times as old
feelings from the past are stirred up, when you become suspicious that the
therapist resembles someone who once hurt or abused you. Hopefully , this
is something you can work through together , because in my experience
patients get better only if they develop deep positive feelings for their
therapists. I also don’ t think that you can grow and change unless you feel
that you have some impact on the person who is treating you.
The critical question is this: Do you feel that your therapist is curious to
find out who you  are and what you , not some generic “PTSD patient,”
need? Are you just a list of symptoms on some diagnostic questionnaire, or
does your therapist take the time to find out why you do what you do and
think what you think? Therapy is a collaborative process—a mutual
exploration of your self.
Patients who have been brutalized by their caregivers as children often
do not feel safe with anyone. I often ask my patients if they can think of any
person they felt safe with while they were growing up. Many of them hold
tight to the memory of that one teacher , neighbor , shopkeeper , coach, or
minister who showed that he or she cared, and that memory is often the
seed of learning to reengage. W e are a hopeful species. W orking with
trauma is as much about remembering how we survived as it is about what
is broken.
I also ask my patients to imagine what they were like as newborns—
whether they were lovable and filled with spunk. All of them believe they
were and have some image of what they must have been like before they
were hurt.
Some people don’ t remember anybody they felt safe with. For them,
engaging with horses or dogs may be much safer than dealing with human
beings. This principle is currently being applied in many therapeutic
settings to great ef fect, including in jails, residential treatment programs,
and veterans’ rehabilitation. Jennifer , a member of the first graduating class
of the V an der Kolk Center ,23 who had come to the program as an out-of-
control, mute fourteen-year -old, said during her graduation ceremony that
having been entrusted with the responsibility of caring for a horse was the
critical first step for her . Her growing bond with her horse helped her feelsafe enough to begin to relate to the staf f of the center and then to focus on
her classes, take her SA T s, and be accepted to college.24
4. COMMUNAL RHYTHMS AND SYNCHRONY
From the moment of our birth, our relationships are embodied in responsive
faces, gestures, and touch.  As we saw in chapter 7, these are the foundations
of attachment. T rauma results in a breakdown of attuned physical
synchrony: When you enter the waiting room of a PTSD clinic, you can
immediately tell the patients from the staf f by their frozen faces and
collapsed (but simultaneously agitated) bodies. Unfortunately , many
therapists ignore those physical communications and focus only on the
words with which their patients communicate.
The healing power of community as expressed in music and rhythms
was brought home for me in the spring of 1997, when I was following the
work of the T ruth and Reconciliation Commission in South Africa. In some
places we visited, terrible violence continued. One day I attended a group
for rape survivors in the courtyard of a clinic in a township outside
Johannesbur g. W e could hear the sound of bullets being fired at a distance
while smoke billowed over the walls of the compound and the smell of
tear gas hung in the air . Later we heard that forty people had been killed.
Y et, while the surroundings were foreign and terrifying, I recognized
this group all too well: The women sat slumped over—sad and frozen—like
so many rape therapy groups  I had seen in Boston. I felt a familiar sense of
helplessness, and, surrounded by collapsed people, I felt myself mentally
collapse as well. Then one of the women started to hum, while gently
swaying back and forth. Slowly a rhythm emer ged; bit by bit other women
joined in. Soon the whole group was singing, moving, and getting up to
dance. It was an astounding transformation: people coming back to life,
faces becoming attuned, vitality returning to bodies. I made a vow to apply
what I was seeing there and to study how rhythm, chanting, and movement
can help to heal trauma.
W e will see more of this in chapter 20, on theater , where I show how
groups of young people—among them juvenile of fenders and at-risk foster
kids—gradually learn to work together and to depend on one another ,
whether as partners in Shakespearean swordplay or as the writers andperformers of full-length musicals. Dif ferent patients have told me how
much choral singing, aikido, tango dancing, and kickboxing have helped
them, and I am delighted to pass their recommendations on to other people I
treat.
I learned another powerful lesson about rhythm and healing when
clinicians at the T rauma Center were asked to treat a five-year -old mute
girl, Y ing Mee, who had been adopted from an orphanage in China. After
months of failed attempts to make contact with her , my colleagues Deborah
Rozelle and Liz W arner realized that her rhythmical engagement system
didn’ t work—she could not resonate with the voices and faces of the people
around her . That led them to sensorimotor therapy .25
The sensory integration clinic in W atertown, Massachusetts, is a
wondrous indoor playground filled with swings, tubs full of multicolored
rubber balls so deep that you can make yourself disappear , balance beams,
crawl spaces fashioned from plastic tubing, and ladders that lead to
platforms from which you can dive onto foam-filled mats. The staf f bathed
Y ing Mee in the tub with plastic balls; that helped her feel sensations on her
skin. They helped her sway on swings and crawl under weighted blankets.
After six weeks something shifted — and she started to talk.26
Y ing Mee’ s dramatic improvement inspired us to start a sensory
integration clinic at the T rauma Center , which we now also use in our
residential treatment programs. W e have not yet explored how well sensory
integration works for traumatized adults, but I regularly incorporate sensory
integration experiences and dance in my seminars.
Learning to become attuned provides parents (and their kids) with the
visceral experience of reciprocity . Parent-child interaction therapy (PCIT) is
an interactive therapy that fosters this, as is SMAR T (sensory motor arousal
regulation treatment), developed by my colleagues at the T rauma Center .27
When we play together , we feel physically attuned and experience a
sense of connection and joy . Improvisation exercises (such as those found at
http://learnimprov .com/) also are a marvelous way to help people connect in
joy and exploration. The moment you see a group of grim-faced people
break out in a giggle, you know that the spell of misery has broken.
5. GETTING IN T OUCHMainstream trauma treatment has paid scant attention to helping terrified
people to safely experience their sensations and emotions. Medications such
as serotonin reuptake blockers, Respiridol and Seroquel increasingly have
taken the place of helping people to deal with their sensory world.28
However , the most natural way that we humans calm down our distress is
by being touched, hugged, and rocked. This helps with excessive arousal
and makes us feel intact, safe, protected, and in char ge.
Rembrandt van Rijn:  Christ Healing the Sick . Gestures of comfort are universally
recognizable and reflect the healing power of attuned touch.
T ouch, the most elementary tool that we have to calm down, is
proscribed from most therapeutic practices. Y et you can’ t fully recover if
you don’ t feel safe in your skin. Therefore, I encourage all my patients to
engage in some sort of bodywork, be it therapeutic massage, Feldenkrais, or
craniosacral therapy .I asked my favorite bodywork practitioner , Licia Sky , about her
practice with traumatized individuals. Here is some of what she told me: “I
never begin a bodywork session without establishing a personal connection.
I’m not taking a history; I’m not finding out how traumatized a person is or
what happened to them. I check in where they are in their body right now . I
ask them if there is anything they want me to pay attention to. All the while,
I’m assessing their posture; whether they look me in the eye; how tense or
relaxed they seem; are they connecting with me or not.
“The first decision I make is if they will feel safer face up or face
down. If I don’ t know them, I usually start face up. I am very careful about
draping; very careful to let them feel safe with whatever clothing they want
to leave on. These are important boundaries to set up right at the beginning.
“Then, with my first touch, I make firm, safe contact. Nothing forced or
sharp. Nothing too fast. The touch is slow , easy for the client to follow ,
gently rhythmic. It can be as strong as a handshake. The first place I might
touch is their hand and forearm, because that’ s the safest place to touch
anybody , the place where they can touch you back.
“Y ou have to meet their point of resistance—the place that has the most
tension—and meet it with an equal amount of ener gy . That releases the
frozen tension. Y ou can’ t hesitate; hesitation communicates a lack of trust
in yourself. Slow movement, careful attuning to the client is dif ferent from
hesitation. Y ou have to meet them with tremendous confidence and
empathy , let the pressure of your touch meet the tension they are holding in
their bodies.”
What does bodywork do for people? Licia’ s reply: “Just like you can
thirst for water , you can thirst for touch. It is a comfort to be met
confidently , deeply , firmly , gently , responsively . Mindful touch and
movement grounds people and allows them to discover tensions that they
may have held for so long that they are no longer even aware of them.
When you are touched, you wake up to the part of your body that is being
touched.
“The body is physically restricted when emotions are bound up inside.
People’ s shoulders tighten; their facial muscles tense. They spend enormous
ener gy on holding back their tears—or any sound or movement that might
betray their inner state. When the physical tension is released, the feelings
can be released. Movement helps breathing to become deeper , and as thetensions are released, expressive sounds can be dischar ged. The body
becomes freer—breathing freer , being in flow . T ouch makes it possible to
live in a body that can move in response to being moved.
“People who are terrified need to get a sense of where their bodies are
in space and of their boundaries. Firm and reassuring touch lets them know
where those boundaries are: what’ s outside them, where their bodies end.
They discover that they don’ t constantly have to wonder who and where
they are. They discover that their body is solid and that they don’ t have to
be constantly on guard. T ouch lets them know that they are safe.”
6. T AKING ACTION
The body responds to extreme experiences by secreting stress hormones.
These are often blamed for subsequent illness and disease. However , stress
hormones are meant to give us the strength and endurance to respond to
extraordinary conditions. People who actively do  something to deal with a
disaster—rescuing loved ones or strangers, transporting people to a
hospital, being part of a medical team, pitching tents or cooking meals—
utilize their stress hormones for their proper purpose and therefore are at
much lower risk of becoming traumatized. (Nonetheless, everyone has his
or her breaking point, and even the best-prepared person may become
overwhelmed by the magnitude of the challenge.)
Helplessness and immobilization keep people from utilizing their stress
hormones to defend themselves. When that happens, their hormones still
are being pumped out, but the actions they’re supposed to fuel are thwarted.
Eventually , the activation patterns that were meant to promote coping are
turned back against the or ganism and now keep fueling inappropriate
fight/flight and freeze responses. In order to return to proper functioning,
this persistent emer gency response must come to an end. The body needs to
be restored to a baseline state of safety and relaxation from which it can
mobilize to take action in response to real danger .
My friends and teachers Pat Ogden and Peter Levine have each
developed powerful body-based therapies, sensorimotor psychotherapy29
and somatic experiencing30 to deal with this issue. In these treatment
approaches the story of what has happened takes a backseat to exploring
physical sensations and discovering the location and shape of the imprintsof past trauma on the body . Before plunging into a full-fledged exploration
of the trauma itself, patients are helped to build up internal resources that
foster safe access sensations and emotions that overwhelmed them at the
time of the trauma. Peter Levine calls this process pendulation —gently
moving in and out of accessing internal sensations and traumatic memories.
In this way patients are helped to gradually expand their window of
tolerance.
Once patients can tolerate being aware of their trauma-based physical
experiences, they are likely to discover powerful physical impulses—like
hitting, pushing, or running—that arose during the trauma but were
suppressed in order to survive. These impulses manifest themselves in
subtle body movements such as twisting, turning, or backing away .
Amplifying these movements and experimenting with ways to modify them
begins the process of bringing the incomplete, trauma-related “action
tendencies” to completion and can eventually lead to resolution of the
trauma. Somatic therapies can help patients to relocate themselves in the
present by experiencing that it is safe to move. Feeling the pleasure of
taking ef fective action restores a sense of agency and a sense of being able
to actively defend and protect themselves.
Back in 1893 Pierre Janet, the first great explorer of trauma, wrote
about “the pleasure of completed action,” and I regularly observe that
pleasure when I practice sensorimotor psychotherapy and somatic
experiencing: When patients can physically experience what it would have
felt like to fight back or run away , they relax, smile, and express a sense of
completion.
When people are forced to submit to overwhelming power , as is true
for most abused children, women trapped in domestic violence, and
incarcerated men and women, they often survive with resigned compliance.
The best way to overcome ingrained patterns of submission is to restore a
physical capacity to engage and defend. One of my favorite body-oriented
ways to build ef fective fight/flight responses is our local impact center ’ s
model mugging program, in which women (and increasingly men) are
taught to actively fight of f a simulated attack.31 The program started in
Oakland, California, in 1971 after a woman with a fifth-degree black belt in
karate was raped. W ondering how this could have happened to someonewho supposedly could kill with her bare hands, her friends concluded that
she had become de-skilled by fear . In the terms of this book, her executive
functions—her frontal lobes—went of f-line, and she froze. The model
mugging program teaches women to recondition the freeze response
through many repetitions of being placed in the “zero hour” (a military term
for the precise moment of an attack) and learning to transform fear into
positive fighting ener gy .
One of my patients, a college student with a history of unrelenting child
abuse, took the course. When I first met her , she was collapsed, depressed,
and overly compliant. Three months later , during her graduation ceremony ,
she successfully fought of f a gigantic male attacker who ended up lying
cringing on the floor (shielded from her blows by a thick protective suit)
while she faced him, arms raised in a karate stance, calmly and clearly
yelling no.
Not long afterward, she was walking home from the library after
midnight when three men jumped out of some bushes, yelling: “Bitch, give
us your money .” She later told me that she took that same karate stance and
yelled back: “Okay , guys, I’ve been looking forward to this moment. Who
wants to take me on first?” They ran away . If you’re hunched over and too
afraid to look around, you are easy prey to other people’ s sadism, but when
you walk around projecting the message “Don’ t mess with me,” you’re not
likely to be bothered.
INTEGRA TING TRAUMA TIC MEMORIES
People cannot put traumatic events behind until they are able to
acknowledge what has happened and start to recognize the invisible demons
they’re struggling with. T raditional psychotherapy has focused mainly on
constructing a narrative that explains why a person feels a particular way or ,
as Sigmund Freud put it back in 1914 in Remembering, Repeating and
W orking Thr ough:32 “While the patient lives [the trauma] through as
something real and actual, we have to accomplish the therapeutic task,
which consists chiefly of translating it back again in terms of the past.”
T elling the story is important; without stories, memory becomes frozen; and
without memory you cannot imagine how things can be dif ferent. But as wesaw in part 4, telling a story about the event does not guarantee that the
traumatic memories will be laid to rest.
There is a reason for that. When people remember an ordinary event,
they do not also relive the physical sensations, emotions, images, smells, or
sounds associated with that event. In contrast, when people fully recall their
traumas, they “have” the experience: They are engulfed by the sensory or
emotional elements of the past. The brain scans of Stan and Ute Lawrence,
the accident victims in chapter 4, show how this happens. When Stan was
remembering his horrendous accident, two key areas in his brain went
blank: the area that provides a sense of time and perspective, which makes
it possible to know that “that was then, but I am safe now ,” and another area
that integrates the images, sounds, and sensations of trauma into a coherent
story . When those parts of the brain are knocked out, you experience
something not as an event with a beginning, a middle, and an end but in
fragments of sensations, images, and emotions.
A trauma can be successfully processed only if all those brain
structures are kept online. In Stan’ s case, eye movement desensitization and
reprocessing (EMDR) allowed him to access his memories of the accident
without being overwhelmed by them. When the brain areas whose absence
is responsible for flashbacks can be kept online while remembering what
has happened, people can integrate their traumatic memories as belonging
to the past.
Ute’ s dissociation (as you recall, she shut down completely)
complicated recovery in a dif ferent way . None of the brain structures
necessary to engage in the present were online, so that dealing with the
trauma was simply impossible. W ithout a brain that is alert and present
there can be no integration and resolution. She needed to be helped to
increase her window of tolerance before she could deal with her PTSD
symptoms.
Hypnosis was the most widely practiced treatment for trauma from the
late 1800s, the time of Pierre Janet and Sigmund Freud, until after W orld
W ar II. On Y ouT ube you can still watch the documentary Let Ther e Be
Light , by the great Hollywood director John Huston, which shows men
under going hypnosis to treat “war neurosis.” Hypnosis fell out of favor in
the early 1990s and there have been no recent studies of its ef fectiveness for
treating PTSD. However , hypnosis can induce a state of relative calm fromwhich patients can observe their traumatic experiences without being
overwhelmed by them. Since that capacity to quietly observe oneself is a
critical factor in the integration of traumatic memories, it is likely that
hypnosis, in some form, will make a comeback.
COGNITIVE BEHA VIORAL THERAPY (CBT)
During their training most psychologists are taught cognitive behavioral
therapy . CBT was first developed to treat phobias such as fear of spiders,
airplanes, or heights, to help patients compare their irrational fears with
harmless realities. Patients are gradually desensitized from their irrational
fears by bringing to mind what they are most afraid of, using their
narratives and images (“imaginal exposure”), or they are placed in actual
(but actually safe) anxiety-provoking situations (“in vivo exposure”), or
they are exposed to virtual-reality , computer -simulated scenes, for example,
in the case of combat-related PTSD, fighting in the streets of Fallujah.
The idea behind cognitive behavioral treatment is that when patients
are repeatedly exposed to the stimulus without bad things actually
happening, they gradually will become less upset; the bad memories will
have become associated with “corrective” information of being safe.33 CBT
also tries to help patients deal with their tendency to avoid, as in “I don’ t
want to talk about it.”34 It sounds simple, but, as we have seen, reliving
trauma reactivates the brain’ s alarm system and knocks out critical brain
areas necessary for integrating the past, making it likely that patients will
relive rather than resolve the trauma.
Prolonged exposure or “flooding” has been studied more thoroughly
than any other PTSD treatment. Patients are asked to “focus their attention
on the traumatic material and . . . not distract themselves with other
thoughts or activities.”35 Research has shown that up to one hundred
minutes of flooding (in which anxiety-provoking triggers are presented in
an intense, sustained form) are required before decreases in anxiety are
reported.36 Exposure sometimes helps to deal with fear and anxiety , but it
has not been proven to help with guilt or other complex emotions.37
In contrast to its ef fectiveness for irrational fears such as spiders, CBT
has not done so well for traumatized individuals, particularly those withhistories of childhood abuse. Only about one in three participants with
PTSD who finish research studies show some improvement.38 Those who
complete CBT treatment usually have fewer PTSD symptoms, but they
rarely recover completely: Most continue to have substantial problems with
their health, work, or mental well-being.39
In the lar gest published study of CBT for PTSD more than one-third of
the patients dropped out; the rest had a significant number of adverse
reactions. Most of the women in the study still suf fered from full-blown
PTSD after three months in the study , and only 15 percent no longer had
major PTSD symptoms.40 A thorough analysis of all the scientific studies of
CBT show that it works about as well as being in a supportive therapy
relationship.41 The poorest outcome in exposure treatments occurs in
patients who suf fer from “mental defeat”—those who have given up.42
Being traumatized is not just an issue of being stuck in the past; it is
just as much a problem of not being fully alive in the present. One form of
exposure treatment is virtual-reality therapy in which veterans wear high-
tech goggles that make it possible to refight the battle of Fallujah in lifelike
detail. As far as I know , the US Marines performed very well in combat.
The problem is that they cannot tolerate being home. Recent studies of
Australian combat veterans show that their brains are rewired to be alert for
emer gencies, at the expense of being focused on the small details of
everyday life.43 (W e’ll learn more about this in chapter 19, on
neurofeedback.) More than virtual-reality therapy , traumatized patients need
“real world” therapy , which helps them to feel as alive when walking
through the local supermarket or playing with their kids as they did in the
streets of Baghdad.
Patients can benefit from reliving their trauma only if they are not
overwhelmed by it. A good example is a study of V ietnam veterans
conducted in the early 1990s by my colleague Roger Pitman.44 I visited
Roger ’ s lab every week during that time, since we were conducting the
study of brain opioids in PTSD that I discussed in chapter 2. Roger would
show me the videotapes of his treatment sessions and we would discuss
what we observed. He and his colleagues pushed the veterans to talk
repeatedly about every detail of their experiences in V ietnam, but the
investigators had to stop the study because many patients became panickedby their flashbacks, and the dread often persisted after the sessions. Some
never returned, while many of those who stayed with the study became
more depressed, violent, and fearful; some coped with their increased
symptoms by increasing their alcohol consumption, which led to further
violence and humiliation, as some of their families called the police to take
them to a hospital.
DESENSITIZA TION
Over the past two decades the prevailing treatment taught to psychology
students has been some form of systematic desensitization: helping patients
become less reactive to certain emotions and sensations. But is this the
correct goal? Maybe the issue is not desensitization but integration: putting
the traumatic event into its proper place in the overall arc of one’ s life.
Desensitization makes me think of the small boy—he must have been
about five—I saw in front of my house recently . His hulking father was
yelling at him at the top of his voice as the boy rode his tricycle down my
street. The kid was unfazed, while my heart was racing and I felt an impulse
to deck the guy . How much brutality had it taken to numb a child this young
to his father ’ s brutality? His indif ference to his father ’ s yelling must have
been the result of prolonged exposure, but, I wondered, at what price? Y es,
we can take drugs that blunt our emotions or we can learn to desensitize
ourselves. As medical students we learned to stay analytical when we had to
treat children with third-degree burns. But, as the neuroscientist Jean
Decety at the University of Chicago has shown, desensitization to our own
or to other people’ s pain tends to lead to an overall blunting of emotional
sensitivity .45
A 2010 report on 49,425 veterans with newly diagnosed PTSD from
the Iraq and Afghanistan wars who sought care from the V A showed that
fewer than one out of ten actually completed the recommended treatment.46
As in Pitman’ s V ietnam veterans, exposure treatment, as currently
practiced, rarely works for them. W e can only “process” horrendous
experiences if they do not overwhelm us. And that means that other
approaches are necessary .DRUGS T O SAFEL Y ACCESS TRAUMA?
When I was a medical student, I spent the summer of 1966 working for Jan
Bastiaans, a professor at Leiden University in the Netherlands who was
known for his work treating Holocaust survivors with LSD. He claimed to
have achieved spectacular results, but when colleagues inspected his
archives, they found few data to support his claims. The potential of mind-
altering substances for trauma treatment was subsequently neglected until
2000, when Michael Mithoefer and his colleagues in South Carolina
received FDA permission to conduct an experiment with MDMA (ecstasy).
MDMA was classified as a controlled substance in 1985 after having been
used for years as a recreational drug. As with Prozac and other psychotropic
agents, we don’ t know exactly how MDMA works, but it is known to
increase concentrations of a number of important hormones including
oxytocin, vasopressin, cortisol, and prolactin.47 Most relevant for trauma
treatment, it increases people’ s awareness of themselves; they frequently
report a heightened sense of compassionate ener gy , accompanied by
curiosity , clarity , confidence, creativity , and connectedness. Mithoefer and
his colleagues were looking for a medication that would enhance the
ef fectiveness of psychotherapy , and they became interested in MDMA
because it decreases fear , defensiveness, and numbing, as well as helping to
access inner experience.48 They thought MDMA might enable patients to
stay within the window of tolerance so they could revisit their traumatic
memories without suf fering overwhelming physiological and emotional
arousal.
The initial pilot studies have supported that expectation.49 The first
study , involving combat veterans, firefighters, and police of ficers with
PTSD, had positive results. In the next study , of a group of twenty victims
of assault who had been unresponsive to previous forms of therapy , twelve
subjects received MDMA and eight received an inactive placebo. Sitting or
lying in a comfortable room, they then all received two eight-hour
psychotherapy sessions, mainly using internal family systems (IFS) therapy ,
the subject of chapter 17 of this book. T wo months later 83 percent of the
patients who received MDMA plus psychotherapy were considered
completely cured, compared with 25 percent of the placebo group. None of
the patients had adverse side ef fects. Perhaps most interesting, when theparticipants were interviewed more than a year after the study was
completed, they had maintained their gains.
By being able to observe the trauma from the calm, mindful state that
IFS calls Self (a term I’ll discuss further in chapter 17), mind and brain are
in a position to integrate the trauma into the overall fabric of life. This is
very dif ferent from traditional desensitization techniques, which are about
blunting a person’ s response to past horrors. This is about association and
integration—making a horrendous event that overwhelmed you in the past
into a memory of something that happened a long time ago.
Nonetheless, psychedelic substances are powerful agents with a
troubled history . They can easily be misused through careless
administration and poor maintenance of therapeutic boundaries. It is to be
hoped that MDMA will not be another magic cure released from Pandora’ s
box.
WHA T ABOUT MEDICA TIONS?
People have always used drugs to deal with traumatic stress. Each culture
and each generation has its preferences—gin, vodka, beer , or whiskey;
hashish, marijuana, cannabis, or ganja; cocaine; opioids like oxycontin;
tranquilizers such as V alium, Xanax, and Klonopin. When people are
desperate, they will do just about anything to feel calmer and more in
control.50
Mainstream psychiatry follows this tradition. Over the past decade the
Departments of Defense and V eterans Af fairs combined have spent over
$4.5 billion on antidepressants, antipsychotics, and antianxiety drugs. A
June 2010 internal report from the Defense Department’ s
Pharmacoeconomic Center at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio showed
that 213,972, or 20 percent of the 1.1 million active-duty troops surveyed,
were taking some form of psychotropic drug: antidepressants,
antipsychotics, sedative hypnotics, or other controlled substances.51
However , drugs cannot “cure” trauma; they can only dampen the
expressions of a disturbed physiology . And they do not teach the lasting
lessons of self-regulation. They can help to control feelings and behavior ,
but always at a price—because they work by blocking the chemical systemsthat regulate engagement, motivation, pain, and pleasure. Some of my
colleagues remain optimistic: I keep attending meetings where serious
scientists discuss their quest for the elusive magic bullet that will
miraculously reset the fear circuits of the brain (as if traumatic stress
involved only one simple brain circuit). I also regularly prescribe
medications.
Just about every group of psychotropic agents has been used to treat
some aspect of PTSD.52 The serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as
Prozac, Zoloft, Ef fexor , and Paxil have been most thoroughly studied, and
they can make feelings less intense and life more manageable. Patients on
SSRIs often feel calmer and more in control; feeling less overwhelmed
often makes it easier to engage in therapy . Other patients feel blunted by
SSRIs—they feel they’re “losing their edge.” I approach it as an empirical
question: Let’ s see what works, and only the patient can be the judge of
that. On the other hand, if one SSRI does not work, it’ s worth trying
another , because they all have slightly dif ferent ef fects. It’ s interesting that
the SSRIs are widely used to treat depression, but in a study in which we
compared Prozac with eye movement desensitization and reprocessing
(EMDR) for patients with PTSD, many of whom were also depressed,
EMDR proved to be a more ef fective antidepressant than Prozac.53 I’ll
return to that subject in chapter 15.54
Medicines that tar get the autonomic nervous system, like propranolol
or clonidine, can help to decrease hyperarousal and reactivity to stress.55
This family of drugs works by blocking the physical ef fects of adrenaline,
the fuel of arousal, and thus reduces nightmares, insomnia, and reactivity to
trauma triggers.56 Blocking adrenaline  can help to keep the rational brain
online and make choices possible: “Is this really what I want to do?” Since I
have started to integrate mindfulness and yoga into my practice, I use these
medications less often, except occasionally to help patients sleep more
restfully .
T raumatized patients tend to like tranquilizing drugs, benzodiazepines
like Klonopin, V alium, Xanax, and Ativan. In many ways, they work like
alcohol, in that they make people feel calm and keep them from worrying.
(Casino owners love customers on benzodiazepines; they don’ t get upset
when they lose and keep gambling.) But also, like alcohol, benzos weakeninhibitions against saying hurtful things to people we love. Most civilian
doctors are  reluctant to prescribe these drugs, because they have a high
addiction potential and they may also interfere with trauma processing.
Patients who stop taking them after prolonged use usually have withdrawal
reactions that make them agitated and increase posttraumatic symptoms.
I sometimes give my patients low doses of benzodiazepines to use as
needed, but not enough to take on a daily basis. They have to choose when
to use up their precious supply , and I ask them to keep a diary of what was
going on when they decided to take the pill. That gives us a chance to
discuss the specific incidents that triggered them.
A few studies have shown that anticonvulsants and mood stabilizers,
such as lithium or valproate, can have mildly positive ef fects, taking the
edge of f hyperarousal and panic.57 The most controversial medications are
the so-called second-generation antipsychotic agents, such as Risperdal and
Seroquel, the lar gest-selling psychiatric drugs in the United States ($14.6
billion in 2008). Low doses of these agents can be helpful in calming down
combat veterans and women with PTSD related to childhood abuse.58
Using these drugs is sometimes justified, for example when patients feel
completely out of control and unable to sleep or where other methods have
failed.59 But it’ s important to keep in mind that these medications work by
blocking the dopamine system, the brain’ s reward system, which also
functions as the engine of pleasure and motivation.
Antipsychotic medications such as Risperdal, Abilify , or Seroquel can
significantly dampen the emotional brain and thus make patients less
skittish or enraged, but they also may interfere with being able to appreciate
subtle signals of pleasure, danger , or satisfaction. They also cause weight
gain, increase the chance of developing diabetes, and make patients
physically inert, which is likely to further increase their sense of alienation.
These drugs are widely used to treat abused children who are
inappropriately diagnosed with bipolar disorder or mood dysregulation
disorder . More than half a million children and adolescents in America are
now taking antipsychotic drugs, which may calm them down but also
interfere with learning age-appropriate skills and developing friendships
with other children.60 A Columbia University study recently found that
prescriptions of antipsychotic drugs for privately insured two- to five-year -olds had doubled between 2000 and 2007.61 Only 40 percent of them had
received a proper mental health assessment.
Until it lost its patent, the pharmaceutical company Johnson & Johnson
doled out LEGO blocks stamped with the word “Risperdal” for the waiting
rooms of child psychiatrists. Children from low-income families are four
times as likely as the privately insured to receive antipsychotic medicines.
In one year alone T exas Medicaid spent $96 million on antipsychotic drugs
for teenagers and children—including three unidentified infants who were
given the drugs before their first birthdays.62 There have been no studies on
the ef fects of psychotropic medications on the developing brain.
Dissociation, self-mutilation, fragmented memories, and amnesia generally
do not respond to any of these medications.
The Prozac study that I discussed in chapter 2 was the first to discover
that traumatized civilians tend to respond much better to medications than
do combat veterans.63 Since then other studies have found similar
discrepancies. In this light it is worrisome that the Department of Defense
and the V A prescribe enormous quantities of medications to combat soldiers
and returning veterans, often without providing other forms of therapy .
Between 2001 and 201 1 the V A spent about $1.5 billion on Seroquel and
Risperdal, while Defense spent about $90 million during the same period,
even though a research paper published in 2001 showed that Risperdal was
no more ef fective than a placebo in treating PTSD.64 Similarly , between
2001 and 2012 the V A spent $72.1 million and Defense spent $44.1 million
on benzodiazepines65—medications that clinicians generally avoid
prescribing to civilians with PTSD because of their addiction potential and
lack of significant ef fectiveness for PTSD symptoms.
THE ROAD OF RECOVER Y IS THE ROAD OF LIFE
In the first chapter of this book I introduced you to a patient named Bill
whom I met over thirty years ago at the V A. Bill became one of my
longtime patient-teachers, and our relationship is also the story of my
evolution of trauma treatment .
Bill had served as a medic in V ietnam in 1967–71, and after he
returned, he tried to use the skills he had learned in the army by working ona burn unit in a local hospital. Nursing kept him frazzled, explosive, and on
edge, but he had no idea that these problems had anything to do with what
he had experienced in V ietnam. After all, the PTSD diagnosis did not yet
exist, and Irish working-class guys in Boston didn’ t consult shrinks. His
nightmares and insomnia subsided a bit after he left nursing and enrolled in
a seminary to become a minister . He did not seek help until after his first
son was born in 1978.
The baby’ s crying triggered unrelenting flashbacks, in which he saw ,
heard, and smelled burned and mutilated children in V ietnam. He was so
out of control that some of my colleagues at the V A wanted to put him in
the hospital to treat what they thought was a psychosis. However , as he and
I started to work together and he began to feel safe with me, he gradually
opened up about what he had witnessed in V ietnam, and he slowly started
to tolerate his feelings without becoming overwhelmed. This helped him to
refocus on taking care of his family and on finishing his training as a
minister . After two years he was a pastor with his own parish, and we felt
that our work was done.
I had no further contact with Bill until he called me up eighteen years
to the day after I first met him. He was experiencing exactly the same
symptoms—flashbacks, terrible nightmares, feelings that he was going
crazy—that he’d had right after his baby was born. That son had just turned
eighteen, and Bill had accompanied him to register for the draft—at the
same armory from which Bill himself had been shipped of f to V ietnam. By
then I knew much more about treating traumatic stress, and Bill and I dealt
with the specific memories of what he had seen, heard, and smelled back in
V ietnam, details that he had been too scared to recall when we first met. W e
could now integrate these memories with EMDR, so that they became
stories of what happened long ago instead of instant transports into the hell
of V ietnam. Once he felt more settled, he wanted to deal with his childhood:
his brutal upbringing and his guilt about having left behind his younger
schizophrenic brother when he enlisted for V ietnam, unprotected against
their father ’ s violent outbursts.
Another important theme of our time together was the day-to-day pain
Bill confronted as a minister—having to bury adolescents killed in car
crashes only a few years after he’d baptized them or having couples he’d
married come back in crisis over domestic violence. Bill went on toor ganize a support group for fellow cler gy faced with similar traumas, and
he became an important force in his community .
Bill’ s third treatment started five years later , when he developed a
serious neurological illness at age fifty-three. He had suddenly started to
experience episodic paralysis in several parts of his body , and he was
beginning to accept that he would probably spend the rest of his life in a
wheelchair . I thought his problems might be due to multiple sclerosis, but
his neurologists could not find specific lesions, and they said there was no
cure for his condition. He told me how grateful he was for his wife’ s
support. She already had arranged to have a wheelchair ramp built to the
kitchen entrance to their house.
Given his grim prognosis, I ur ged Bill to find a way to fully feel and
befriend the distressing feelings in his body , just as he had learned to
tolerate and live with his most painful memories of the war . I suggested that
he consult a body worker who had introduced me to Feldenkrais, a gentle,
hands-on approach to rearranging physical sensations and muscle
movements. When Bill came back to report on how he was doing, he
expressed delight with his increased sense of control. I mentioned that I’d
recently started to do yoga myself and that we had just opened up a yoga
program at the T rauma Center . I invited him to explore that as his next step.
Bill found a local Bikram yoga class, a hot and intense practice usually
reserved for young and ener getic people. Bill loved it, even though parts of
his body occasionally gave way in class. Despite his physical disability , he
gained a sense of bodily pleasure and mastery that he had never felt before.
Bill’ s psychological treatment had helped him put the horrendous
experience of V ietnam in the past. Now befriending his body was keeping
him from or ganizing his life around the loss of physical control. He decided
to become certified as a yoga instructor , and he began teaching yoga at his
local armory to the veterans who were returning from Iraq and Afghanistan.
T oday , ten years later , Bill continues to be fully engaged in life—with
his children and grandchildren, through his work with veterans, and in his
church. He copes with his physical limitations as an inconvenience. T o date
he has taught yoga classes to more than 1,300 returning combat veterans.
He still regularly suf fers from the sudden weakness in his limbs that
requires him to sit or lie down. But, like his memories of childhood andV ietnam, these episodes do not dominate his existence. They are simply
part of the ongoing, evolving story of his life.IC H A P T E R  1 4
L A N G U A G E :  M I R A C L E  A N D
T Y R A N N Y
Give sorrow words; the grief that does not speak knits up the o’er
wrought heart and bids it break.
—W illiam Shakespear e, Macbeth
W e can hardly bear to look. The shadow may carry the best of the
life we have not lived. Go into the basement, the attic, the refuse
bin. Find gold there. Find an animal who has not been fed or
watered. It is you!! This neglected, exiled animal, hungry for
attention, is a part of your self.
—Marion W oodman (as quoted by Stephen Cope in The Great W ork of Y our Life )
n September 2001 several or ganizations, including the National Institutes
of Health, Pfizer pharmaceuticals, and the New Y ork T imes Company
Foundation, or ganized expert panels to recommend the best treatments for
people traumatized by the attacks on the W orld T rade Center . Because
many widely used trauma interventions had never been carefully evaluated
in random communities (as opposed to patients who seek psychiatric help),
I thought that this presented an extraordinary opportunity to compare how
well a variety of dif ferent approaches would work. My colleagues were
more conservative, and after lengthy deliberations the committeesrecommended only two forms of treatment: psychoanalytically oriented
therapy and cognitive behavioral therapy . Why analytic talk therapy? Since
Manhattan is one of the last bastions of Freudian psychoanalysis, it would
have been bad politics to exclude a substantial proportion of local mental
health practitioners. Why CBT? Because behavioral treatment can be
broken down into concrete steps and “manualized” into uniform protocols,
it is the favorite treatment of academic researchers, another group that could
not be ignored. After the recommendations were approved, we sat back and
waited for New Y orkers to find their way to therapists’ of fices. Almost
nobody showed up.
Dr . Spencer Eth, who ran the psychiatry department at the now-defunct
St. V incent’ s Hospital in Greenwich V illage, was curious where survivors
had turned for help, and early in 2002, together with some medical students,
he conducted a survey of 225 people who had escaped from the T win
T owers. Asked what had been most helpful in overcoming the ef fects of
their experience, the survivors credited acupuncture, massage, yoga, and
EMDR, in that order .1 Among rescue workers, massages were particularly
popular . Eth’ s survey suggests that the most helpful interventions focused
on relieving the physical burdens generated by trauma. The disparity
between the survivors’ experience and the experts’ recommendations is
intriguing. Of course, we don’ t know how many survivors eventually did
seek out more traditional therapies. But the apparent lack of interest in talk
therapy raises a basic question: What good is it to talk about your trauma?
THE UNSPEAKABLE TRUTH
Therapists have an undying faith in the capacity of talk to resolve trauma.
That confidence dates back to 1893, when Freud (and his mentor , Breuer)
wrote that trauma “immediately and permanently disappeared when we had
succeeded in bringing clearly to light the memory of the event by which it
was provoked and in arousing its accompanying af fect, and when the
patient had described that event in the greatest possible detail and had put
the af fect into words.”2
Unfortunately , it’ s not so simple: T raumatic events are almost
impossible to put into words. This is true for all of us, not just for peoplewho suf fer from PTSD. The initial imprints of the events of September 1 1
were not stories but images: frantic people running down the street, their
faces covered with ash; an airplane smashing into T ower One of the W orld
T rade Center; the distant specks that were people jumping hand in hand.
Those images were replayed over and over , in our minds and on the TV
screen, until Mayor Giuliani and the media helped us create a narrative we
could share with one another .
In Seven Pillars of W isdom  T . E. Lawrence wrote of his war
experiences: “W e learned that there were pangs too sharp, griefs too deep,
ecstasies too high for our finite selves to register . When emotion reached
this pitch the mind choked; and memory went white till the circumstances
were humdrum once more.”3 While trauma keeps us dumbfounded, the path
out of it is paved with words, carefully assembled, piece by piece, until the
whole story can be revealed.
BREAKING THE SILENCE
Activists in the early campaign for AIDS awareness created a powerful
slogan: “Silence = Death.” Silence about trauma also leads to death—the
death of the soul. Silence reinforces the godforsaken isolation of trauma.
Being able to say aloud to another human being, “I was raped” or “I was
battered by my husband” or “My parents called it discipline, but it was
abuse” or “I’m not making it since I got back from Iraq,” is a sign that
healing can begin.
W e may think we can control our grief, our terror , or our shame by
remaining silent, but naming of fers the possibility of a dif ferent kind of
control. When Adam was put in char ge of the animal kingdom in the Book
of Genesis, his first act was to give a name to every living creature.
If you’ve been hurt, you need to acknowledge and name what happened
to you. I know that from personal experience: As long as I had no place
where I could let myself know what it was like when my father locked me
in the cellar of our house for various three-year -old of fenses, I was
chronically preoccupied with being exiled and abandoned. Only when I
could talk about how that little boy felt, only when I could for give him for
having been as scared and submissive as he was, did I start to enjoy thepleasure of my own company . Feeling listened to and understood changes
our physiology; being able to articulate a complex feeling, and having our
feelings recognized, lights up our limbic brain and creates an “aha
moment.” In contrast, being met by silence and incomprehension kills the
spirit. Or , as John Bowlby so memorably put it: “What can not be spoken to
the [m]other cannot be told to the self.”
If you hide from yourself the fact that an uncle molested you when you
were young, you are vulnerable to react to triggers like an animal in a
thunderstorm: with a full-body response to the hormones that signal
“danger .” W ithout language and context, your awareness may be limited to:
“I’m scared.”  Y et, determined to stay in control, you are likely to avoid
anybody or anything that reminds you even vaguely of your trauma. Y ou
may also alternate between being inhibited and being uptight or reactive
and explosive—all without knowing why .
As long as you keep secrets and suppress information, you are
fundamentally at war with yourself. Hiding your core feelings takes an
enormous amount of ener gy , it saps your motivation to pursue worthwhile
goals, and it leaves you feeling bored and shut down. Meanwhile, stress
hormones keep flooding your body , leading to headaches, muscle aches,
problems with your bowels or sexual functions—and irrational behaviors
that may embarrass you and hurt the people around you. Only after you
identify the source of these responses can you start using your feelings as
signals of problems that require your ur gent attention.
Ignoring inner reality also eats away at your sense of self, identity , and
purpose. Clinical psychologist Edna Foa and her colleagues developed the
Posttraumatic Cognitions Inventory to assess how patients think about
themselves.4 Symptoms of PTSD often include statements like  “I feel dead
inside,” “I will never be able to feel normal emotions again,” “I have
permanently changed for the worse,” “I feel like an object, not like a
person,” “I have no future,” and “I feel like I don’ t know myself anymore.”
The critical issue is allowing yourself to know what you know . That
takes an enormous amount of courage. In What It Is Like to Go to W ar ,
V ietnam veteran Karl Marlantes grapples with his memories of belonging to
a brilliantly ef fective Marine combat unit and confronts the terrible split he
discovered inside himself:For years I was unaware of the need to heal that split, and there
was no one, after I returned, to point this out to me. . . . Why did I
assume there was only one person inside me? . . . There’ s a part of
me that just loves maiming, killing, and torturing. This part of me
isn’ t all of me. I have other elements that indeed are just the
opposite, of which I am proud. So am I a killer? No, but part of me
is. Am I a torturer? No, but part of me is. Do I feel horror and
sadness when I read in the newspapers of an abused child? Y es.
But am I fascinated?5
Marlantes tells us that his road to recovery required learning to tell the
truth, even if that truth was brutally painful.
Death, destruction, and sorrow need to be constantly justified in the
absence of some overarching meaning for the suf fering. Lack of this
overarching meaning encourages making things up, lying, to fill the gap in
meaning.6
I’d never been able to tell anyone what was going on inside. So I
forced these images back, away , for years. I began to reintegrate
that split-of f part of my experience only after I actually began to
imagine that kid as a kid, my kid perhaps. Then, out came this
overwhelming sadness—and healing. Integrating the feelings of
sadness, rage, or all of the above with the action should be
standard operating procedure for all soldiers who have killed face-
to-face. It requires no sophisticated psychological training. Just
form groups under a fellow squad or platoon member who has had
a few days of group leadership training and encourage people to
talk.7
Getting perspective on your terror and sharing it with others can
reestablish the feeling that you are a member of the human race. After the
V ietnam veterans I treated joined a therapy group where they could share
the atrocities they had witnessed and committed, they reported beginning to
open their hearts to their girlfriends.THE MIRACLE OF SELF-DISCOVER Y
Discovering your Self in language is always an epiphany , even if finding
the words to describe your inner reality can be an agonizing process. That is
why I find Helen Keller ’ s account of how she was “born into language”8 so
inspiring.
When Helen was nineteen months old and just starting to talk, a viral
infection robbed her of her sight and hearing. Now deaf, blind, and mute,
this lovely , lively child turned into an untamed, isolated creature. After five
desperate years her family invited a partially blind teacher , Anne Sullivan,
to come from Boston to their home in rural Alabama as Helen’ s tutor . Anne
began immediately to teach Helen the manual alphabet, spelling words into
her hand letter by letter , but it took ten weeks of trying to connect with this
wild child before the breakthrough occurred. It came as Anne spelled the
word “water” into one of Helen’ s hands while she held the other under the
water pump.
Helen later recalled that moment in The Story of My Life : “W ater! That
word startled my soul, and it awoke, full of the spirit of the morning. . . .
Until that day my mind had been like a darkened chamber , waiting for
words to enter and light the lamp, which is thought. I learned a great many
words that day .”
Learning the names of things enabled the child not only to create an
inner representation of the invisible and inaudible physical reality around
her but also to find herself: Six months later she started to use the first-
person “I.”
Helen’ s story reminds me of the abused, recalcitrant, uncommunicative
kids we see in our residential treatment programs. Before she acquired
language, she was bewildered and self-centered—looking back, she called
that creature “Phantom.” And indeed, our kids come across as phantoms
until they can discover who they are and feel safe enough to communicate
what is going on with them.
In a later book, The W orld I Live In , Keller again described her birth
into selfhood: “Before my teacher came to me, I did not know that I am. I
lived in a world that was a no-world. . . . I had neither will nor intellect. . . .
I can remember all this, not because I knew that it was so, but because Ihave tactual memory . It enables me to remember that I never contracted my
forehead in the act of thinking.”9
Helen’ s “tactual” memories—memories based only on touch—could
not be shared. But language opened up the possibility of joining a
community . At age eight, when Helen went with Anne to the Perkins
Institution for the Blind in Boston (where Sullivan herself had trained), she
became able to communicate with other children for the first time: “Oh,
what happiness!” she wrote. “T o talk freely with other children! T o feel at
home in the great world!”
Helen’ s discovery of language with the help of Anne Sullivan captures
the essence of a therapeutic relationship: finding words where words were
absent before and, as a result, being able to share your deepest pain and
deepest feelings with another human being. This is one of most profound
experiences we can have, and such resonance, in which hitherto unspoken
words can be discovered, uttered, and received, is fundamental to healing
the isolation of trauma—especially if other people in our lives have ignored
or silenced us. Communicating fully is the opposite of being traumatized.
KNOWING YOURSELF OR TELLING YOUR ST OR Y?
OUR DUAL A W ARENESS SYSTEM
Anyone who enters talk therapy , however , almost immediately confronts the
limitations of language. This was true of my own psychoanalysis. While I
talk easily and can tell interesting tales, I quickly realized how dif ficult it
was to feel my feelings deeply and simultaneously report them to someone
else. When I got in touch with the most intimate, painful, or confusing
moments of my life, I often found myself faced with a choice: I could either
focus on reliving old scenes in my mind’ s eye and let myself feel what I had
felt back then, or I could tell my analyst logically and coherently what had
transpired. When I chose the latter , I would quickly lose touch with myself
and start to focus on his  opinion of what I was telling him. The slightest
hint of doubt or judgment would shut me down, and I would shift my
attention to regaining his approval.
Since then neuroscience research has shown that we possess two
distinct forms of self-awareness: one that keeps track of the self across timeand one that registers the self in the present moment. The first, our
autobiographical self, creates connections among experiences and
assembles them into a coherent story . This system is rooted in language.
Our narratives change with the telling, as our perspective changes and as we
incorporate new input .
The other system, moment-to-moment self-awareness, is based
primarily in physical sensations, but if we feel safe are not rushed, we can
find words to communicate that experience as well. These two ways of
knowing are localized in dif ferent parts of the brain that are lar gely
disconnected from each other .10 Only the system devoted to self-awareness,
which is based in the medial prefrontal cortex, can change the emotional
brain.
In the groups I used to lead for veterans,  I could sometimes see these
two systems working side by side. The soldiers told horrible tales of death
and destruction, but I noticed that their bodies often simultaneously radiated
a sense of pride and belonging. Similarly , many patients tell me about the
happy families they grew up in while their bodies are slumped over and
their voices sound anxious and uptight. One system creates a story for
public consumption, and if we tell that story often enough, we are likely to
start believing that it contains the whole truth. But the other system registers
a dif ferent truth: how we experience the situation deep inside. It is this
second system that needs to be accessed, befriended, and reconciled.
Just recently at my teaching hospital, a group of psychiatric residents
and I interviewed a young woman with temporal lobe epilepsy who was
being evaluated following a suicide attempt. The residents asked her
standard questions about her symptoms, the medications she was taking,
how old she was when the diagnosis was made, what had made her try to
kill herself. She responded in a flat, matter -of-fact voice: She’d been five
when she was diagnosed. She’d lost her job; she knew she’d been faking it;
she felt worthless. For some reason one of the residents asked whether she
had been sexually abused. That question surprised me: She had given us no
indication that she had had problems with intimacy or sexuality , and I
wondered if the doctor was pursuing a private agenda.
Y et the story our patient told did not explain why she had fallen apart
after losing her job. So I asked her what it had been like for that five-year -old girl to be told that something was wrong with her brain. That forced her
to check in with herself, as she had no ready-made script for that question.
In a subdued tone of voice she told us that the worst part of her diagnosis
was that afterward her father wanted nothing more to do with her: “He just
saw me as a defective child.” Nobody had supported her , she said, so she
basically had to manage by herself.
I then asked her how she felt now about that little girl with newly
diagnosed epilepsy who was left on her own. Instead of crying for her
loneliness or being angry about the lack of support, she said fiercely: “She
was stupid, whiny , and dependent. She should have stepped up to the plate
and sucked it up.” That passion obviously came from the part of her that
had valiantly tried to cope with her distress, and I acknowledged that it
probably had helped her survive back then. I asked her to allow that
frightened, abandoned girl to tell her what it had been like to be all alone,
her illness compounded by family rejection. She started to sob and kept
quiet for a long time until finally she said: “ No, she did not deserve that.
She should have been supported; somebody should have looked after her .”
Then she shifted again and proudly told me about her accomplishments—
how much she’d achieved despite that lack of support. Public story and
inner experience finally met.
THE BODY IS THE BRIDGE
T rauma stories lessen the isolation of trauma, and they provide an
explanation  for why people suf fer the way they do. They allow doctors to
make diagnoses, so that they can address problems like insomnia, rage,
nightmares, or numbing. Stories can also provide people with a tar get to
blame. Blaming is a universal human trait that helps people feel good while
feeling bad, or , as my old teacher Elvin Semrad used to say: “Hate makes
the world go round.” But stories also obscure a more important issue,
namely , that trauma radically changes people: that in fact they no longer are
“themselves.”
It is excruciatingly dif ficult to put that feeling of no longer being
yourself into words. Language evolved primarily to share “things out
there,” not to communicate our inner feelings, our interiority . (Again, thelanguage center of the brain is about as far removed from the center for
experiencing one’ s self as is geographically possible.) Most of us are better
at describing someone else than we are at describing ourselves. As I once
heard Harvard psychologist Jerome Kagan say: “The task of describing
most private experiences can be likened to reaching down to a deep well to
pick up small fragile crystal figures while you are wearing thick leather
mittens.”1 1
W e can get past the slipperiness of words by engaging the self-
observing, body-based self system, which speaks through sensations, tone
of voice, and body tensions. Being able to perceive visceral sensations is
the very foundation of emotional awareness.12 If a patient tells me that he
was eight when his father deserted the family , I am likely to stop and ask
him to check in with himself: What happens inside when he tells me about
that boy who never saw his father again? Where is it registered in his body?
When you activate your gut feelings and listen to your heartbreak—when
you follow the interoceptive pathways to your innermost recesses—things
begin to change.
WRITING T O YOURSELF
There are other ways to access your inner world of feelings. One of the
most ef fective is through writing. Most of us have poured out our hearts in
angry , accusatory , plaintive, or sad letters after people have betrayed or
abandoned us. Doing so almost always makes us feel better , even if we
never send them. When you write to yourself, you don’ t have to worry
about other people’ s judgment—you just listen to your own thoughts and let
their flow take over . Later , when you reread what you wrote, you often
discover surprising truths.
As functioning members of society , we’re supposed to be “cool” in our
day-to-day interactions and subordinate our feelings to the task at hand.
When we talk with someone with whom we don’ t feel completely safe, our
social editor jumps in on full alert and our guard is up. W riting is dif ferent.
If you ask your editor to leave you alone for a while, things will come out
that you had no idea were there. Y ou are free to go into a sort of a trance
state in which your pen (or keyboard) seems to channel whatever bubblesup from inside. Y ou can connect those self-observing and narrative parts of
your brain without worrying about the reception you’ll get.
In the practice called free writing, you can use any object as your own
personal Rorschach test for entering a stream of associations. Simply write
the first thing that comes to your mind as you look at the object in front of
you and then keep going without stopping, rereading, or crossing out. A
wooden spoon on the counter may trigger memories of making tomato
sauce with your grandmother—or of being beaten as a child. The teapot
that’ s been passed down for generations may take you meandering to the
furthest reaches of your mind to the loved ones you’ve lost or family
holidays that were a mix of love and conflict. Soon an image will emer ge,
then a memory , and then a paragraph to record it. Whatever shows up on the
paper will be a manifestation of associations that are uniquely yours.
My patients often bring in fragments of writing and drawings about
memories that they may not yet be ready to discuss. Reading the content out
loud would probably overwhelm them, but they want me to be aware of
what they are wrestling with. I tell them how much I appreciate their
courage in allowing themselves to explore hitherto hidden parts of
themselves and in entrusting me with them. These tentative
communications guide my treatment plan—for example, by helping me to
decide whether to add somatic processing, neurofeedback, or EMDR to our
current work.
As far as I’m aware, the first systematic test of the power of language
to relieve trauma was done in 1986, when James Pennebaker at the
University of T exas in Austin turned his introductory psychology class into
an experimental laboratory . Pennebaker started of f with a healthy respect
for the importance of inhibition, of keeping things to yourself, which he
viewed as the glue of civilization.13 But he also assumed that people pay a
price for trying to suppress being aware of the elephant in the room.
He began by asking each student to identify a deeply personal
experience that they’d found very stressful or traumatic. He then divided
the class into three groups: One would write about what was currently
going on in their lives; the second would write about the details of the
traumatic or stressful event; and the third would recount the facts of the
experience, their feelings and emotions about it, and what impact theythought this event had had on their lives. All of the students wrote
continuously for fifteen minutes on four consecutive days while sitting
alone in a small cubicle in the psychology building.
The students took the study very seriously; many revealed secrets that
they had never told anyone. They often cried as they wrote, and many
confided in the course assistants that they’d become preoccupied with these
experiences. Of the two hundred participants, sixty-five wrote about a
childhood trauma. Although the death of a family member was the most
frequent topic ,  22 percent of the women and 10 percent of the men reported
sexual trauma prior to the age of seventeen.
The researchers asked the students about their health and were
surprised how often the students spontaneously reported histories of major
and minor health problems: cancer , high blood pressure, ulcers, flu,
headaches, and earaches.14 Those who reported a traumatic sexual
experience in childhood had been hospitalized an average of 1.7 days in the
previous year—almost twice the rate of the others.
The team then compared the number of visits to the student health
center participants had made during the month prior to the study to the
number in the month following it. The group that had written about both the
facts and the emotions related to their trauma clearly benefited the most:
They had a 50 percent drop in doctor visits compared with the other two
groups. W riting about their deepest thoughts and feelings about traumas had
improved their mood and  resulted in a more optimistic attitude and better
physical health.
When the students themselves were asked to assess the study , they
focused on how it had increased their self-understanding: “It helped me
think about what I felt during those times. I never realized how it af fected
me before.” “I had to think and resolve past experiences. One result of the
experiment was peace of mind. T o have to write about emotions and
feelings helped me understand how I felt and why .”15
In a subsequent study Pennebaker asked half of a group of seventy-two
students to talk into a tape recorder about the most traumatic experience of
their lives; the other half discussed their plans for the rest of the day . As
they spoke, researchers monitored their physiological reactions: blood
pleasure, heart rate, muscle tension, and hand temperature.16 This study hadsimilar results: Those who allowed themselves to feel their emotions
showed significant physiological changes, both immediate and long term.
During their confessions blood pressure, heart rate, and other autonomic
functions increased, but afterward their arousal fell to levels below where
they had been at the start of the study . The drop in blood pressure could still
be measured six weeks after the experiment ended.
It is now widely accepted that stressful experiences—whether divorce
or final exams or loneliness—have a negative ef fect on immune function,
but this was a highly controversial notion at the time of Pennebaker ’ s study .
Building on his protocols, a team of researchers at the Ohio State University
College of Medicine compared two groups of students who wrote either
about a personal trauma or about a superficial topic.17 Again, those who
wrote about personal traumas had fewer visits to the student health center ,
and their improved health correlated with improved immune function, as
measured by the action of T lymphocytes (natural killer cells) and other
immune markers in the blood. This ef fect was most obvious directly after
the experiment, but it could still be the detected six weeks later . W riting
experiments from around the world, with grade school students, nursing
home residents, medical students, maximum-security prisoners, arthritis
suf ferers, new mothers, and rape victims, consistently show that writing
about upsetting events improves physical and mental health.
Another aspect of Pennebaker ’ s studies caught my attention: When his
subjects talked about intimate or dif ficult issues, they often changed their
tone of voice and speaking style. The dif ferences were so striking that
Pennebaker wondered if he had mixed up his tapes. For example, one
woman described her plans for the day in a childlike, high-pitched voice,
but a few minutes later , when she described stealing one hundred dollars
from an open cash register , both the volume and pitch of her voice became
so much lower that she sounded like an entirely dif ferent person.
Alterations in emotional states were also reflected in the subjects’
handwriting. As participants changed topics, they might move from cursive
to block letters and back to cursive; there were also variations in the slant of
the letters and in the pressure of their pens.Such changes are called “switching” in clinical practice, and we see
them often in individuals with trauma histories. Patients activate distinctly
dif ferent emotional and physiological states as they move from one topic to
another . Switching manifests not only as remarkably dif ferent vocal patterns
but also in dif ferent facial expressions and body movements. Some patients
even appear to change their personal identity , from timid to forceful and
aggressive or from anxiously compliant to starkly seductive. When they
write about their deepest fears, their handwriting often becomes more
childlike and primitive.If patients who present in such dramatically dif ferent states are treated
as fakes, or if they are told to stop showing their unpredictably annoying
parts, they are likely to become mute. They probably will continue to seek
help, but after they have been silenced they will transmit their cries for help
not by talking but by acting: with suicide attempts, depression, and rage
attacks. As we will see in chapter 17, they will improve only if both patient
and therapist appreciate the roles that these dif ferent  states have played in
their survival.
AR T , MUSIC, AND DANCE
There are thousands of art, music, and dance therapists who do beautiful
work with abused children, soldiers suf fering from PTSD, incest victims,
refugees, and torture survivors, and numerous accounts attest to the
ef fectiveness of expressive therapies.18 However , at this point we know
very little about how they work or about the specific aspects of traumatic
stress they address, and it would present an enormous logistical andfinancial challenge to do the research necessary to establish their value
scientifically .
The capacity of art, music, and dance to circumvent the speechlessness
that comes with terror may be one reason they are used as trauma
treatments in cultures around the world. One of the few systematic studies
to compare nonverbal artistic expression with writing  was done by James
Pennebaker and Anne Krantz, a San Francisco dance and movement
therapist.19 One-third of a group of sixty-four students was asked to
disclose a personal traumatic experience through expressive body
movements for at least ten minutes a day for three consecutive days and
then to write about it for another ten minutes. A second group danced but
did not write about their trauma, and a third group engaged in a routine
exercise program. Over the three following months members of all groups
reported that they felt happier and healthier . However , only the expressive
movement group that also wrote showed objective evidence: better physical
health and an improved grade-point average. (The study did not evaluate
specific PTSD symptoms.) Pennebaker and Krantz concluded: “The mere
expression of the trauma is not suf ficient. Health does appear to require
translating experiences into language.”
However , we still do not know whether this conclusion—that language
is essential to healing—is, in fact, always true. W riting studies that have
focused on PTSD symptoms (as opposed to general health) have been
disappointing. When I discussed this with Pennebaker , he cautioned me that
most writing studies of PTSD patients have been done in group settings
where participants were expected to share their stories. He reiterated the
point I’ve made above — that the object of writing is to write to yourself, to
let your self know what you have been trying to avoid.
THE LIMITS OF LANGUAGE
T rauma overwhelms listeners as well as speakers. In The Gr eat W ar in
Modern Memory , his masterful study of W orld W ar I, Paul Fussell
comments brilliantly on the zone of silence that trauma creates:One of the cruxes of war . . . is the collision between events and
the language available—or thought appropriate—to describe
them. . . . Logically there is no reason why the English language
could not perfectly well render the actuality of . . . warfare: it is
rich in terms like blood , terr or , agony , madness , shit , cruelty ,
mur der , sell-out , pain  and hoax , as well as phrases like legs blown
off , intestines gushing out over his hands , scr eaming all night ,
bleeding to death fr om the r ectum , and the like. . . . The problem
was less one of “language” than of gentility and optimism. . . . The
real reason [that soldiers fall silent] is that soldiers have discovered
that no one is very interested in the bad news they have to report.
What listener wants to be torn and shaken when he doesn’ t have to
be? W e have made unspeakable  mean indescribable: it really
means nasty .20
T alking about painful events doesn’ t necessarily establish community
—often quite the contrary . Families and or ganizations may reject members
who air the dirty laundry; friends and family can lose patience with people
who get stuck in their grief or hurt. This is one reason why trauma victims
often withdraw and why their stories become rote narratives, edited into a
form least likely to provoke rejection.
It is an enormous challenge to find safe places to express the pain of
trauma, which is why survivor groups like Alcoholics Anonymous, Adult
Children of Alcoholics, Narcotics Anonymous, and other support groups
can be so critical. Finding a responsive community in which to tell your
truth makes recovery possible. That is also why survivors need professional
therapists who are trained to listen to the agonizing details of their lives. I
recall the first time a veteran told me about killing a child in V ietnam. I had
a vivid flashback to when I was about seven years old and my father told
me that a child next door had been beaten to death by Nazi soldiers in front
of our house for showing a lack of respect. My reaction to the veteran’ s
confession was too much to bear , and I had to end the session. That is why
therapists need to have done their own intensive therapy , so they can take
care of themselves and remain emotionally available to their patients, even
when their patients’ stories arouse feelings of rage or revulsion.A dif ferent problem arises when trauma victims themselves become
literally speechless—when the language area of the brain shuts down.21 I
have seen this shutdown in the courtroom in many immigration cases and
also in a case brought against a perpetrator of mass slaughter in Rwanda.
When asked to testify about their experiences, victims often become so
overwhelmed that they are barely able to speak or are hijacked into such
panic that they can’ t clearly articulate what happened to them. Their
testimony is often dismissed as being too chaotic, confused, and fragmented
to be credible.
Others try to recount their history in a way that keeps them from being
triggered. This can make them come across as evasive and unreliable
witnesses. I have seen dozens of legal cases dismissed because asylum
seekers were unable to give coherent accounts of their reasons for fleeing.
I’ve also known numerous veterans whose claims were denied by the
V eterans Administration because they could not tell precisely what had
happened to them.
Confusion and mutism are routine in therapy of fices: W e fully expect
that our patients will become overwhelmed if we keep pressing them for the
details of their story . For that reason we’ve learned to “pendulate” our
approach to trauma, to use a term coined by my friend Peter Levine. W e
don’ t avoid confronting the details, but we teach our patients how to safely
dip one toe in the water and then take it out again, thus approaching the
truth gradually .
W e start by establishing inner “islands of safety” within the body .22
This means helping patients identify parts of the body , postures, or
movements where they can ground themselves whenever they feel stuck,
terrified, or enraged. These parts usually lie outside the reach of the vagus
nerve, which carries the messages of panic to the chest, abdomen, and
throat, and they can serve as allies in integrating the trauma. I might ask a
patient if her hands feel okay , and if she says yes, I’ll ask her to move them,
exploring their lightness and warmth and flexibility . Later , if I see her chest
tighten and her breath almost disappear , I can stop her and ask her to focus
on her hands and move them, so that she can feel herself as separate from
the trauma. Or I might ask her to focus on her out breath and notice how shecan change it, or ask her to lift her arms up and down with each breath—a
qigong movement.
For some patients tapping acupressure points is a good anchor .23 I ask
others to feel the weight of their body in the chair or to plant their feet on
the floor . I might ask a patient who is collapsing into silence to see what
happens when he sits up straight. Some patients discover their own islands
of safety—they begin to “get” that they can create body sensations to
counterbalance feeling out of control. This sets the stage for trauma
resolution: pendulating between states of exploration and safety , between
language and body , between remembering the past and feeling alive in the
present.
DEALING WITH REALITY
Dealing with traumatic memories is, however , just the beginning of
treatment. Numerous studies have found that people with PTSD have more
general problems with focused attention and with learning new
information.24 Alexander McFarlane did a simple test: He asked a group of
people to name as many words beginning with the letter B  as they could in
one minute. Normal subjects averaged fifteen words; those with PTSD
averaged three or four . Normal subjects hesitated when they saw
threatening words like “blood,” “wound,” or “rape”; McFarlane’ s PTSD
subjects reacted just as hesitantly to ordinary words like “wool,” “ice
cream,” and “bicycle.”25
After a while most people with PTSD don’ t spend a great deal of time
or ef fort on dealing with the past—their problem is simply making it
through the day . Even traumatized patients who are making real
contributions in teaching, business, medicine, or the arts and who are
successfully raising their children expend a lot more ener gy on the everyday
tasks of living than do ordinary mortals.
Y et another pitfall of language is the illusion that our thinking can
easily be corrected if it doesn’ t “make sense.” The “cognitive” part of
cognitive behavioral therapy focuses on changing such “dysfunctional
thinking.” This is a top-down approach to change in which the therapist
challenges or “reframes” negative cognitions, as in “ Let’ s  compare yourfeelings that you are to blame for your rape  with the actual facts of the
matter” or  “Let’ s compare your terror of driving with  the statistics about
road safety today .”
I’m reminded of the distraught woman who once came to our clinic
asking for help with her two-month-old because the baby was “so selfish.”
W ould she have benefited from a fact sheet on child development or an
explanation of the concept of altruism? Such information would be unlikely
to help her until she gained access to the frightened, abandoned parts of
herself—the parts expressed by her terror of dependence.
There is no question traumatized people have irrational thoughts: “I
was to blame for being so sexy .” “The other guys weren’ t afraid—they’re
real men.” “I should have known better than to walk down that street.” It’ s
best to treat those thoughts as cognitive flashbacks—you don’ t ar gue with
them any more than you would ar gue with someone who keeps having
visual flashbacks of a terrible accident. They are residues of traumatic
incidents: thoughts they were thinking when, or shortly after , the traumas
occurred that are reactivated under stressful conditions. A better way to
treat them is with EMDR, the subject of the following chapter .
BECOMING SOME BODY
The reason people become overwhelmed by telling their stories, and the
reason they have cognitive flashbacks, is that their brains have changed. As
Freud and Breuer observed, trauma does not simply act as a releasing agent
for symptoms. Rather , “the psychical trauma—or more precisely the
memory of the trauma—acts like a foreign body which long after its entry
must continue to be regarded as an agent that still is at work.”26 Like a
splinter that causes an infection, it is the body’ s response to the foreign
object that becomes the problem more than the object itself.
Modern neuroscience solidly supports Freud’ s notion that many of our
conscious thoughts are complex rationalizations for the flood of instincts,
reflexes, motives, and deep-seated memories that emanate from the
unconscious. As we have seen, trauma interferes with the proper
functioning of brain areas that manage and interpret experience . A robust
sense of self—one that allows a person to state confidently , “This is what Ithink and feel” and “This is what is going on with me”—depends on a
healthy and dynamic interplay among these areas.
Almost every brain-imaging study of trauma patients finds abnormal
activation of the insula. This part of the brain integrates and interprets the
input from the internal or gans—including our muscles, joints, and balance
(proprioceptive) system—to generate the sense of being embodied. The
insula can transmit signals to the amygdala that trigger fight/fight
responses. This does not require any cognitive input or any conscious
recognition that something has gone awry—you just feel on edge and
unable to focus or , at worst, have a sense of imminent doom. These
powerful feelings are generated deep inside the brain and cannot be
eliminated by reason or understanding.
Being constantly assaulted by , but consciously cut of f from, the origin
of bodily sensations produces alexithymia: not being able to sense and
communicate what is going on with you. Only by getting in touch with your
body , by connecting viscerally with your self, can you regain a sense of
who you are, your priorities and values. Alexithymia, dissociation, and
shutdown all involve the brain structures that enable us to focus, know what
we feel, and take action to protect ourselves. When these essential
structures are subjected to inescapable shock, the result may be confusion
and agitation, or it may be emotional detachment, often accompanied by
out-of-body experiences—the feeling you’re watching yourself from far
away . In other words trauma makes people feel like either  some body else ,
or like no body . In order to overcome trauma, you need help to get back in
touch with your body , with your Self .
There is no question that language is essential: Our sense of Self
depends on being able to or ganize our memories into a coherent whole.27
This requires  well-functioning connections between the conscious brain and
the self system of the body—connections that often are damaged by trauma.
The full story  can be told only after those structures are repaired and after
the groundwork has been laid: after no body becomes some body .DC H A P T E R  1 5
L E T T I N G  G O  O F  T H E  P A S T :  E M D R
W as it a vision, or a waking dream? 
 Fled is that music;—Do I wake or sleep?
—John Keats
avid, a middle-aged contractor , came to see me because his violent
rage attacks were making his home a living hell. During our first
session he told me a story about something that had happened to him the
summer he was twenty-three. He was working as a lifeguard, and one
afternoon a group of kids were roughhousing in the pool and drinking beer .
David told them alcohol was not allowed. In response the boys attacked
him, and one of them took out his left eye with a broken beer bottle. Thirty
years later he still had nightmares and flashbacks about the stabbing.
He was merciless in his criticisms of his own teenage son and often
yelled at him for the slightest infraction, and he simply could not bring
himself to show any af fection toward his wife. On some level he felt that
the tragic loss of his eye gave him permission to abuse other people, but he
also hated the angry , vengeful person he had become. He had noticed that
his ef forts to manage his rage made him chronically tense, and he wondered
if his fear of losing control had made love and friendship impossible.
During his second visit I introduced a procedure called eye movement
desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR). I asked David to go back to the
details of his assault and bring to mind his images of the attack, the soundshe had heard, and the thoughts that had gone through his mind. “Just let
those moments come back,” I told him.
I then asked him to follow my index finger as I moved it slowly back
and forth about twelve inches from his right eye. W ithin seconds a cascade
of rage and terror came to the surface, accompanied by vivid sensations of
pain, blood running down his cheek, and the realization that he couldn’ t see.
As he reported these sensations, I made an occasional encouraging sound
and kept moving my finger back and forth. Every few minutes I stopped
and asked him to take a deep breath. Then I asked him to pay attention to
what was now on his mind, which was a fight he had had in school. I told
him to notice that and to stay with that memory . Other memories emer ged,
seemingly at random: looking for his assailants everywhere, wanting to hurt
them, getting into barroom brawls. Each time he reported a new memory or
sensation, I ur ged him to notice what was coming to mind and resumed the
finger movements.
At the end of that visit he looked calmer and visibly relieved. He told
me that the memory of the stabbing had lost its intensity—it was now
something unpleasant that had happened a long time ago. “It really sucked,”
he said thoughtfully , “and it kept me of f-kilter for years, but I’m surprised
what a good life I eventually was able to carve out for myself.”
Our third session, the following week, dealt with the aftermath of the
trauma: how he had used drugs and alcohol for years to cope with his rage.
As we repeated the EMDR sequences, still more memories arose. David
remembered talking with a prison guard he knew about having his
incarcerated assailant killed and then changing his mind. Recalling this
decision was profoundly liberating: He had come to see himself as a
monster who was barely in control, but realizing that he’d turned away from
revenge put him back in touch with a mindful, generous side of himself.
Next he spontaneously realized he was treating his son the way he had
felt toward his teenaged attackers. As our session ended, he asked if I could
meet with him and his family so he could tell his son what had happened
and ask for his for giveness. At our fifth and final session he reported that he
was sleeping better and said that for the first time in his life he felt a sense
of inner peace. A year later he called to report not only that his he and wife
had grown closer and had started to practice yoga together but also that he
laughed more and took real pleasure in his gardening and woodworking.LEARNING ABOUT EMDR
My experience with David is one of many I have had over the past two
decades in which EMDR helped to make painful re-creations of the trauma
a thing of the past. My introduction to this method came through Maggie, a
spunky young psychologist who ran a halfway house for sexually abused
girls. Maggie got into one confrontation after another , clashing with nearly
everybody—except the thirteen- and fourteen-year -old girls she cared for .
She did drugs, had dangerous and often violent boyfriends, had frequent
altercations with her bosses, and moved from place to place because she
could not tolerate her roommates (nor they her). I never understood how she
had mobilized enough stability and concentration to earn a PhD in
psychology from a reputable graduate school.
Maggie had been referred to a therapy group I was running for women
with similar problems. During her second meeting she told us that her father
had raped her twice, once when she was five years old and once when she
was seven. She was convinced it had been her fault. She loved her daddy ,
she explained, and she must have been so seductive that he could not
control himself. Listening to her I thought, “She might not blame her father ,
but she sure is blaming just about everybody else”—including her previous
therapists for not helping her get better . Like many trauma survivors, she
told one story with words and another in her actions, in which she kept
replaying various aspects of her trauma.
Then one day Maggie came to the group eager to discuss a remarkable
experience she’d had the previous weekend at an EMDR training for
professionals. At that time I’d heard only that EMDR was a new fad in
which therapists wiggled their fingers in front of patients’ eyes. T o me and
my academic colleagues, it sounded like yet another of the crazes that have
always plagued psychiatry , and I was convinced that this would turn out to
be another of Maggie’ s misadventures.
Maggie told us that during her EMDR session she had vividly
remembered her father ’ s rape when she was seven—remembered it from
inside her child’ s body . She could feel physically how small she was; she
could feel her father ’ s huge body on top of her and could smell the alcohol
on his breath. And yet, she told us, even as she relived the incident she was
able to observe it from the point of view of her twenty-nine-year -old self.She burst into tears: “I was such a little girl. How could a huge man do this
to a little girl?” She cried for a while and then said: “It’ s over now . I now
know what happened. It wasn’ t my fault. I was a little girl and there was
nothing I could do to keep him from molesting me.”
I was astounded. I had been looking for a long time for a way to help
people revisit their traumatic past without becoming retraumatized. It
seemed that Maggie had had an experience as lifelike as a flashback and yet
had not been hijacked by it. Could EMDR make it safe for people to access
the imprints of trauma? Could it then transform them into memories of
events that had happened far in the past?
Maggie had a few more EMDR sessions and remained in our group
long enough for us to see how she changed. She was much less angry , but
she kept that sardonic sense of humor that I enjoyed so much. A few
months later she got involved with a very dif ferent kind of man than she’d
ever been attracted to before. She left the group, announcing that she’d
resolved her trauma, and I decided it was time for me to get trained in
EMDR.
EMDR: FIRST EXPOSURES
Like many scientific advances, EMDR originated with a chance
observation. One day in 1987 psychologist Francine Shapiro was walking
through a park, preoccupied with some painful memories, when she noticed
that rapid eye movements produced a dramatic relief from her distress. How
could a major treatment modality grow from such a brief experience? How
is it possible that such a simple process had not been noted before? Initially
skeptical about her observation she subjected her method to years of
experimentation and research, gradually building it into a standardized
procedure that could be taught and tested in controlled studies.1
I arrived for my first EMDR training in need of some trauma
processing myself. A few weeks earlier the Jesuit priest who was chair of
my department at Massachusetts General Hospital had suddenly  shut down
the T rauma Clinic, leaving us scrambling for a new site and new funds to
treat our patients, train our students, and conduct our research. At around
the same time, my friend Frank Putnam, who was doing the long-term studyof sexually abused girls that I discussed in chapter 10, was fired from  the
National Institutes of Health and Rick Kluft, the country’ s foremost expert
on dissociation, lost his unit at the Institute of the Pennsylvania Hospital. It
might have all been  a  coincidence,  but it felt as if my whole world was
under attack.
My distress about the T rauma Clinic seemed like a good test for my
EMDR trial. While I was following my partner ’ s fingers with my eyes, a
rapid succession of fuzzy childhood scenes came to mind: intense family
dinner -table conversations, confrontations with schoolmates during recess,
throwing pebbles at a shed window with my older brother—all of them the
sort of vivid, floating, “hypnopompic” images we experience when we
slumber late on a Sunday morning, then for get the moment we fully
awaken.
After about half an hour my fellow trainee and I revisited the scene in
which my boss told me that he was closing my clinic. Now I felt resigned:
“Okay , it happened, and now it’ s time to move on.” I never looked back; the
clinic later reconstituted itself and has thrived ever since. W as EMDR the
sole reason I was able to let go of my anger and distress? Of course I’ll
never know for certain, but my mental journey—through unrelated
childhood scenes to putting the episode to rest—was unlike anything I had
experienced in talk therapy .
What happened next, when it was my turn to administer EMDR, was
even more intriguing. W e rotated to a dif ferent group, and my new fellow
student, whom I’d never met before, told me he wanted to address some
painful childhood incidents involving his father , but he did not want to
discuss them. I had never worked on anybody’ s trauma without knowing
“the story ,” and I was annoyed and flustered by his refusal to share any
details. While I was moving my fingers in front of his eyes, he looked
intensely distressed—he began sobbing, and his breathing became rapid and
shallow . But  each time I asked him the questions that the protocol called
for , he refused to tell me what came to his mind.
At the end of our  forty-five-minute session, the first thing my colleague
said was that he’d found dealing with me so unpleasant that he would never
refer a patient to me. Otherwise, he remarked, the EMDR session had
resolved the matter of his father ’ s abuse . While I was skeptical and
suspected that his rudeness toward me was a carryover from unresolvedfeelings toward his father , there was no question that he appeared much
more relaxed.
I turned to my EMDR trainer , Gerald Puk, and told him how
flummoxed I was. This man clearly did not like me, and had looked
profoundly distressed during the EMDR session, but now he was telling me
that his long-standing misery was gone. How could I possibly know what
he had or had not resolved if he was unwilling to tell me what had happened
during the session?
Gerry smiled and asked if by chance I had become a mental health
professional in order to solve some of my own personal issues. I confirmed
that most people who knew me thought that might be the case. Then he
asked if I found it meaningful when people told me their trauma stories.
Again, I had to agree with him. Then he said: “Y ou know , Bessel, maybe
you need to learn to put your voyeuristic tendencies on hold. If it’ s
important for you to hear trauma stories, why don’ t you go to a bar , put a
couple of dollars on the table, and say to your neighbor , ‘I’ll buy you a
drink if you tell me your trauma story .’ But you really need to know the
dif ference between your desire to hear stories and your patient’ s internal
process of healing.” I took Gerry’ s admonition to heart and ever since have
enjoyed repeating it to my students.
I left my EMDR training preoccupied with three issues that fascinate
me to this day:
EMDR loosens up something  in the mind/brain that gives
people rapid access to loosely associated memories and images
from their past. This seems to help them put the traumatic
experience into a lar ger context or perspective.
People may be able to heal from trauma without talking about it.
EMDR enables them to observe their experiences in a new way ,
without verbal give-and-take with another person.
EMDR can help even if the patient and the therapist do not have
a trusting relationship. This was particularly intriguing because
trauma, understandably , rarely leaves people with an open,
trusting heart.In the years since, I have done EMDR with patients who spoke Swahili,
Mandarin, and Breton, all languages in which I can say only , “Notice that,”
the key EMDR instruction. (I always had a translator available, but
primarily to explain the steps of the process.) Because EMDR doesn’ t
require patients to speak about the intolerable or explain to a therapist why
they feel so upset, it allows them to stay fully focused on their internal
experience, with sometimes extraordinary results.
STUDYING EMDR
The T rauma Clinic was saved by a manager at the Massachusetts
Department of Mental Health who had followed our work with children and
now asked us to take on the task of or ganizing the community trauma
response team for the Boston area. That was enough to cover our basic
operations, and the rest was supplied by an ener getic staf f who loved what
we were doing—including the newly discovered power of EMDR to cure
some of the patients whom we’d been unable to help before.
My colleagues and I began to show one another videotapes of our
EMDR sessions with PTSD patients, which enabled us to observe dramatic
week-by-week improvements. W e then started to formally measure their
progress on a standard PTSD rating scale. W e also arranged with Elizabeth
Matthew , a young neuroimaging specialist at the New England Deaconess
Hospital, to have twelve patients’ brains scanned before and after their
treatment. After only three EMDR sessions eight of the twelve had shown a
significant decrease in their PTSD scores. On their scans we could see a
sharp increase in prefrontal lobe activation after treatment, as well as much
more activity in the anterior cingulate and the basal ganglia. This shift could
account for the dif ference in how they now experienced their trauma.
One man reported: “I remember it as though it was a real memory , but
it was more distant. T ypically , I drowned in it, but this time I was floating
on top. I had the feeling that I was in control.” A woman told us: “Before, I
felt each and every step of it. Now it is like a whole, instead of fragments,
so it is more manageable.” The trauma had lost its immediacy and become a
story about something that happened a long time ago.W e subsequently secured funding from the National Institutes of
Mental Health to compare the ef fects of EMDR with standard doses of
Prozac or a placebo.2 Of our eighty-eight subjects thirty received EMDR,
twenty-eight Prozac, and the rest the sugar pill. As often happens, the
people on placebo did well. After eight weeks their 42 percent improvement
was greater than that for many other treatments that are promoted as
“evidence based.”
The group on Prozac did slightly better than the placebo group, but
barely so. This is typical of most studies of drugs for PTSD: Simply
showing up brings about a 30 percent to 42 percent improvement; when
drugs work, they add an additional 5 percent to 15 percent. However , the
patients on EMDR did substantially better than those on either Prozac or the
placebo: After eight EMDR sessions one in four were completely cured
(their PTSD scores had dropped to negligible levels), compared with one in
ten of the Prozac group. But the real dif ference occurred over time: When
we interviewed our subjects eight months later , 60 percent of those who had
received EMDR scored as being completely cured. As the great psychiatrist
Milton Erickson said, once you kick the log, the river will start flowing.
Once people started to integrate their traumatic memories, they
spontaneously continued to improve. In contrast, all those who had taken
Prozac relapsed when they went of f the drug.
This study was significant because it demonstrated that a focused,
trauma-specific therapy for PTSD like EMDR could be much more
ef fective than medication. Other studies have confirmed that if patients take
Prozac or related drugs like Celexa, Paxil, and Zoloft, their PTSD
symptoms often improve, but only as long as they keep taking them. This
makes drug treatment much more expensive in the long run. (Interestingly ,
despite Prozac’ s status as a major antidepressant, in our study EMDR also
produced a greater reduction in depression scores than taking the
antidepressant.)
Another key finding of our study: Adults with histories of childhood
trauma responded very dif ferently to EMDR from those who were
traumatized as adults. At the end of eight weeks, almost half of the adult-
onset group that received EMDR scored as completely cured, while only 9
percent of the child-abuse group showed such pronounced improvement.Eight months later the cure rate was 73 percent for the adult-onset group,
compared with 25 percent for those with histories of child abuse. The child-
abuse group had small but consistently positive responses to Prozac.
These results reinforce the findings that I reported in chapter 9: Chronic
childhood abuse causes very dif ferent mental and biological adaptations
than discrete traumatic events in adulthood. EMDR is a powerful treatment
for stuck traumatic memories, but it doesn’ t necessarily resolve the ef fects
of the betrayal and abandonment that accompany physical or sexual abuse
in childhood. Eight weeks of therapy of any kind is rarely suf ficient to
resolve the legacy of long-standing trauma.
As of 2014 our EMDR study had the most positive outcome of any
published study of people who developed their PTSD in reaction to a
traumatic event as an adult. But despite these results, and those of dozens of
other studies, many of my colleagues continue to be  skeptical about EMDR
— perhaps because it seems too good to be true, too simple to be so
powerful. I surely can understand that sort of skepticism—EMDR is an
unusual procedure. Interestingly , in the first solid scientific study using
EMDR in combat veterans with PTSD, EMDR was expected to do so
poorly that it was included as the control condition for comparison with
biofeedback-assisted relaxation therapy . T o the researchers’ surprise, twelve
sessions of EMDR turned out to be the more ef fective treatment.3 EMDR
has since become one of the treatments for PTSD sanctioned by the
Department of V eterans Af fairs.
IS EMDR A FORM OF EXPOSURE THERAPY?
Some psychologists have hypothesized that EMDR actually desensitizes
people to the traumatic material and thus is related to exposure therapy . A
more accurate description would be that it integrates  the traumatic material.
As our research showed, after EMDR people thought of the trauma as a
coherent event in the past, instead of experiencing sensations and images
divorced from any context.
Memories evolve and change. Immediately after a memory is laid
down, it under goes a lengthy process of integration and reinterpretation—a
process that automatically happens in the mind/brain without any inputfrom the conscious self. When the process is complete, the experience is
integrated with other life events and stops having a life of its own.4 As we
have seen, in PTSD this process fails and the memory remains stuck—
undigested and raw .
Unfortunately , few psychologists are taught during their training how
the memory-processing system in the brain works. This omission can lead
to misguided approaches to treatment. In contrast to phobias (such as a
spider phobia, which is based on a specific irrational fear), posttraumatic
stress is the result of a fundamental reor ganization of the central nervous
system based on having experienced an actual threat of annihilation, (or
seeing someone else being annihilated), which reor ganizes self experience
(as helpless) and the interpretation of reality (the entire world is a
dangerous place).
During exposure patients initially become extremely upset. As they
revisit the traumatic experience, they show sharp increases in their heart
rate, blood pressure, and stress hormones. But if they manage to stay with
the treatment and keep reliving their trauma, they slowly become less
reactive and  less prone to disintegrate when they recall the event. As a
result, they get lower scores on their PTSD ratings. However , as far as we
know , simply exposing someone to the old trauma does not integrate the
memory into the overall context of their lives, and it rarely restores them to
the level of joyful engagement with people and pursuits they had prior to
the trauma.
In contrast, EMDR, as well as the treatments discussed in subsequent
chapters—internal family systems, yoga, neurofeedback, psychomotor
therapy , and theater—focus not only on regulating the intense memories
activated by trauma but also on restoring a sense of agency , engagement,
and commitment through ownership of body and mind.
PROCESSING TRAUMA WITH EMDR
Kathy was a twenty-one-year -old student at a local university . When I first
met her , she looked terrified. She had been in psychotherapy for three years
with a therapist whom she trusted and felt understood by but with whom
she was not making any progress. After her third suicide attempt heruniversity health service referred her to me, hoping that the new technique
I’d told them about could help her .
Like several of my other traumatized patients, Kathy was able to
become completely absorbed in her studies: When she read a book or wrote
a research paper , she could block out everything else about her life. This
enabled her to be a competent student, even when she had no idea how to
establish a loving relationship with herself, let alone with an intimate
partner .
Kathy told me that her father had used her for many years for child
prostitution, which would normally have made me think of using EMDR
only as an adjunctive therapy . However , she turned out to be an EMDR
virtuoso and recovered completely after eight sessions, the shortest time
thus far in my experience for someone with a history of severe childhood
abuse. Those sessions took place fifteen years ago, and I recently met with
her to discuss the pros and cons of her adopting a third child. She was a
delight: smart, funny , and joyfully engaged with her family and her work as
an assistant professor of child development.
I’d like to share my notes on Kathy’ s fourth EMDR treatment, not only
to demonstrate what typically happens in such a session  but also to reveal
the human mind in action as it integrates a traumatic experience. No brain
scan, blood test, or rating scale can measure this, and even a video
recording can convey only a shadow of how EMDR can unleash the
imaginative powers of the mind.
Kathy sat with her chair at a forty-five-degree angle to mine, so that we
were about four feet apart. I asked her to bring a particularly painful
memory to mind and encouraged her to recall what she had heard, saw ,
thought, and felt in her body as it took place. (My records do not show
whether she told me what the particular memory was; my guess is probably
not, since I did not write it down.)
I asked her whether she was now “in the memory ,” and when she said
yes, I asked her how real it felt on a scale of one to ten. About a nine, she
said. Then I asked her to follow my moving finger with her eyes. From time
to time, after completing a set of about twenty-five eye movements, I might
say: “T ake a deep breath,” followed by: “What do you get now?” or “What
comes to mind now?” Kathy would then tell me what she was thinking.
Whenever her tone of voice, facial expression, body movements, orbreathing patterns indicated that this was an emotionally significant theme,
I would say , “Notice that,” and start another set of eye movements, during
which she did not speak. Other than uttering those few words, I remained
silent for the next forty-five minutes.
Here is the association Kathy reported after the first eye-movement
sequence: “I realize that I have scars—from when he tied my hands behind
my back. The other scar is when he marked me to claim me as his, and
there [she points] are bite marks.” She looked stunned but surprisingly calm
as she recalled, “I remember being doused in gasoline—he took Polaroid
pictures of me—and then I was submer ged in water . I was gang raped by
my father and two of his friends; I was tied to a table; I remember them
raping me with Budweiser bottles.”
My stomach was clenching, but I didn’ t comment beyond asking Kathy
to keep those memories in mind. After about thirty more back-and-forth
movements I stopped when I saw that she was smiling. When I asked what
she was thinking, she said, “I was in a karate class; it was great! I really
kicked butt! I saw them backing of f. I yelled, ‘Don’ t you see you are
hurting me? I am not your girlfriend.’” I said, “Stay there,” and began the
next sequence. When it ended, Kathy said: “I have an image of two me’ s—
this smart, pretty little girl . . . and that little slut. All these women who
could not take care of themselves or me or their men—leaving it up to me
to service all these men.” She started to sob during the next sequence, and
when we stopped, she said: “I saw how little I was—the brutalization of the
little girl. It was not my fault.” I nodded and said, “That’ s right—stay
there.” The next round ended with Kathy reporting: “I’m picturing my life
now—my big me holding my little me—saying, ‘Y ou are safe now .’” I
nodded encouragingly and continued.
The images kept coming: “I have pictures of a bulldozer flattening the
house I grew up in. It’ s over!” Then Kathy started on a dif ferent track: “I
am thinking about how much I like Jef frey [a boy in one of her classes].
Thinking that he might not want to hang out with me. Thinking I can’ t
handle it. I have never been someone’ s girlfriend before and I don’ t know
how .” I asked her what she thought she needed to know and began the next
sequence. “Now , there is a person who just wants to be with me—it is too
simple. I don’ t know how to just be myself around men. I am petrified.”As she tracked my finger , Kathy started to sob. When I stopped, she
told me: “I had an image of Jef frey and me sitting in the cof feehouse. My
father comes in the door . He starts screaming at the top of his lungs and he
is wielding an ax; he says, ‘I told you that you belong to me.’ He puts me
on top of the table — then he rapes me, and then he rapes Jef frey .” She was
crying hard now . “How can you be open with somebody when you have
visions of your dad raping you and then raping us both?” I wanted to
comfort her , but I knew it was more important to keep her associations
moving. I asked her to focus on what she felt in her body: “I feel it in my
forearms, in my shoulders, and my right chest. I just want to be held.” W e
continued the EMDR and when we stopped, Kathy looked relaxed. “I heard
Jef frey say it’ s okay , that he was sent here to take care of me. And that it
was not anything that I did and that he just wants to be with me for my
sake.” Again I asked what she felt in her body . “I feel really peaceful. A
little bit shaky — like when you’re using new muscles. Some relief. Jef frey
knows all this already . I feel like I’m alive and that it is all over . But I am
afraid that my father has another little girl, and that makes me very , very
sad. I want to save her .”
But as we continued the trauma returned, together with other thoughts
and images: “I need to throw up. . . . I have intrusions of lots of smells — bad
cologne, alcohol, vomit.” A few minutes later Kathy was crying profusely:
“I really feel my mom here now . It feels like she wants me to for give her . I
have the sense that the same thing happened to her — she is apologizing to
me over and over . She’ s telling me that this happened to her — that it was my
grandfather . She’ s also telling me that my grandmother is really sorry for
not being there to protect me.” I kept asking her to take deep breaths and
stay with whatever was coming up.
At the end of the next sequence Kathy said: “I feel like it’ s over . I felt
my grandmother holding me at my current age — telling me that she is so
sorry she married my grandfather . That she and my mom are making sure
that it stops here.” After one final EMDR sequence Kathy was smiling: “I
have an image of pushing my father out of the cof feehouse and Jef frey
locking the door behind him. He stands outside. Y ou can see him through
the glass—everybody’ s making fun of him.”
W ith the help of EMDR Kathy was able to integrate the memories of
her trauma and call on her imagination to help her lay them to rest, arrivingat a sense of completion and control. She did so with minimal input from
me and without any discussion of the particulars of her experiences. (I
never felt a reason to question their accuracy; her experiences were real to
her , and my job was to help her deal with them in the present.) The process
freed something in her mind/brain to activate new images, feelings, and
thoughts; it was as if her life force emer ged to create new possibilities for
her future.5
As we’ve seen, traumatic memories persist as split-of f, unmodified
images, sensations, and feelings. T o my mind the most remarkable feature
of EMDR is its apparent capacity to activate a series of unsought and
seemingly unrelated sensations, emotions, images, and thoughts in
conjunction with the original memory . This way of reassembling old
information into new packages may be just the way we integrate ordinary ,
nontraumatic day-to-day experiences.
EXPLORING THE SLEEP CONNECTION
Shortly after learning about EMDR I was asked to speak about my work at
the sleep laboratory headed by Allan Hobson at the Massachusetts Mental
Health Center . Hobson (together with his teacher , Michel Jouvet)6 was
famous for discovering where dreams are generated in the brain, and one of
his research assistants, Robert Stickgold, was just then beginning to explore
the function of dreams. I showed the group a videotape of a patient who had
suf fered from severe PTSD for thirteen years after a terrible car accident
and who, in only two sessions of EMDR, had transformed from a helpless
panicked victim into a confident, assertive woman. Bob was fascinated.
A few weeks later a friend of Stickgold’ s family became so depressed
after the death of her cat that she had to be hospitalized. The attending
psychiatrist concluded that the cat’ s death had triggered unresolved
memories of the death of the woman’ s mother when she was twelve, and he
connected her with Roger Solomon, a well-known EMDR trainer , who
treated her successfully . Afterward she called Stickgold and said, “Bob, you
have to study this. It’ s really strange — it has to do with your brain, not your
mind.”Soon afterward an article appeared in the journal Dr eaming  suggesting
that EMDR was related to rapid eye movement (REM) sleep — the phase of
sleep in which dreaming occurs.7 Research had already shown that sleep,
and dream sleep in particular , plays a major role in mood regulation. As the
article in Dr eaming  pointed out, the eyes move rapidly back and forth in
REM sleep, just as they do in EMDR. Increasing our time in REM sleep
reduces depression, while the less REM sleep we get, the more likely we
are to become depressed.8
Of course, PTSD is notoriously associated with disturbed sleep, and
self-medication with alcohol or drugs further disrupts REM sleep. During
my time at the V A my colleagues and I had found that the veterans with
PTSD frequently woke themselves up soon after going into REM sleep9—
probably because they had activated a trauma fragment during a dream.10
Other researchers have also noticed this phenomenon, but thought that it
was irrelevant to understanding PTSD.1 1
T oday we know that both deep sleep and REM sleep play important
roles in how memories change over time. The sleeping brain reshapes
memory by increasing the imprint of emotionally relevant information
while helping irrelevant material fade away .12 In a series of elegant studies
Stickgold and his colleagues showed that the sleeping brain can even make
sense out of information whose relevance is unclear while we are awake
and integrate it into the lar ger memory system.13
Dreams keep replaying, recombining, and reintegrating pieces of old
memories for months and even years.14 They constantly update the
subterranean realities that determine what our waking minds pay attention
to. And perhaps most relevant to EMDR, in REM sleep we activate more
distant associations than in either non-REM sleep or the normal waking
state. For example, when subjects are wakened from non-REM sleep and
given a word-association test, they give standard responses: hot/cold,
hard/soft, etc. W akened from REM sleep, they make less conventional
connections, such as thief/wrong.15 They also solve simple anagrams more
easily after REM sleep. This shift toward activation of distant associations
could explain why dreams are so bizarre.16
Stickgold, Hobson, and their colleagues thus discovered that dreams
help to for ge new relationships between apparently unrelated memories.17Seeing novel connections is the cardinal feature of creativity; as we’ve
seen, it’ s also essential to healing. The inability to recombine experiences is
also one of the striking features of PTSD. While Noam in chapter 4 could
imagine a trampoline to save future victims of terrorism, traumatized people
are trapped in frozen associations: Anybody who wears a turban will try to
kill me; any man who finds me attractive wants to rape me.
Finally , Stickgold suggests a clear link between EMDR and memory
processing in dreams: “If the bilateral stimulation of EMDR can alter brain
states in a manner similar to that seen during REM sleep then there is now
good evidence that EMDR should be able to take advantage of sleep-
dependent processes, which may be blocked or inef fective in PTSD
suf ferers, to allow ef fective memory processing and trauma resolution.”18
The basic EMDR instruction, “Hold that image in your mind and just watch
my fingers moving back and forth,” may very well reproduce what happens
in the dreaming brain. As this book is going to press Ruth Lanius and I are
studying how the brain reacts, both while remembering a traumatic event
and an ordinary experience, to saccadic eye movements as subjects lie in an
fMRI scanner . Stay tuned.
ASSOCIA TION AND INTEGRA TION
Unlike conventional exposure treatment, EMDR spends very little time
revisiting the original trauma. The trauma itself is certainly the starting
point, but the focus is on stimulating and opening up the associative
process. As our Prozac/EMDR study showed, drugs can blunt the images
and sensations of terror , but they remain embedded in the mind and body . In
contrast with the subjects who improved on Prozac—whose memories were
merely blunted, not integrated as an event that happened in the past, and
still caused considerable anxiety—those who received EMDR no longer
experienced the distinct imprints of the trauma: It had become a story of a
terrible event that had happened a long time ago. As one of my patients
said, making a dismissive hand gesture: “It’ s over .”
While we don’ t yet know precisely how EMDR works, the same is true
of Prozac. Prozac has an ef fect on serotonin, but whether its levels go up or
down, and in which brain cells, and why that makes people feel less afraid,is still unclear . W e likewise don’ t know precisely why talking to a trusted
friend gives such profound relief, and I am surprised how few people seem
eager to explore that question.19
Clinicians have only one obligation: to do whatever they can to help
their patients get better . Because of this, clinical practice has always been a
hotbed for experimentation. Some experiments fail, some succeed, and
some, like EMDR, dialectical behavior therapy , and internal family systems
therapy , go on to change the way therapy is practiced. V alidating all these
treatments takes decades and is hampered by the fact that research support
generally goes to methods that have already been proven to work. I am
much comforted by considering the history of penicillin: Almost four
decades passed between the discovery of its antibiotic properties by
Alexander Fleming in 1928 and the final elucidation of its mechanisms in
1965.TC H A P T E R  1 6
L E A R N I N G  T O  I N H A B I T  Y O U R  B O D Y :
Y O G A
As we begin to re-experience a visceral reconnection with the
needs of our bodies, there is a brand new capacity to warmly love
the self. W e experience a new quality of authenticity in our caring,
which redirects our attention to our health, our diets, our ener gy ,
our time management. This enhanced care for the self arises
spontaneously and naturally , not as a response to a “should.” W e
are able to experience an immediate and intrinsic pleasure in self-
care.
—Stephen Cope, Y oga and the Quest for the T rue Self
he first time I saw Annie she was slumped over in a chair in my
waiting room, wearing faded jeans and a purple Jimmy Clif f T -shirt.
Her legs were visibly shaking, and she kept staring at the floor even after I
invited her in. I had very little information about her , other than that she
was forty-seven years old and taught special-needs children. Her body
communicated clearly that she was too terrified to engage in conversation—
or even to provide routine information about her address or insurance plan.
People who are this scared can’ t think straight, and any demand to perform
will only make them shut down further . If you insist, they’ll run away and
you’ll never see them again.Annie shuf fled into my of fice and remained standing, barely breathing,
looking like a frozen bird. I knew we couldn’ t do anything until I could help
her quiet down. Moving to within six feet of her and making sure she had
unobstructed access to the door , I encouraged her to take slightly deeper
breaths. I breathed with her and asked her to follow my example, gently
raising my arms from my sides as she inhaled and lowering them as I
exhaled, a qigong technique that one of my Chinese students had taught me.
She stealthily followed my movements, her eyes still fixed on the floor . W e
spent about half an hour this way . From time to time I quietly asked her to
notice how her feet felt against the floor and how her chest expanded and
contracted with each breath. Her breath gradually became slower and
deeper , her face softened, her spine straightened a bit, and her eyes lifted to
about the level of my Adam’ s apple. I began to sense the person behind that
overwhelming terror . Finally she looked more relaxed and showed me the
glimmer of a smile, a recognition that we both were in the room. I
suggested that we stop there for now—I’d made enough demands on her—
and asked whether she would like to come back a week later . She nodded
and muttered, “Y ou sure are weird.”
As I got to know Annie, I inferred from the notes she wrote and the
drawings she gave me that she had been dreadfully abused by both her
father and her mother as a very young child. The full story was only
gradually revealed, as she slowly learned to call up some of the things that
had happened to her without her body being hijacked into uncontrollable
anxiety .
I learned that Annie was extraordinarily skilled and caring in her work
with special-needs kids. (I tried out quite a few of the techniques she told
me about with the children in our own clinic and found them extremely
helpful). She would talk freely about the children she taught but would clam
up immediately if we ver ged on her relationships with adults. I knew she
was married, but she barely mentioned her husband. She often coped with
disagreements and confrontations by making her mind disappear . When she
felt overwhelmed she’d cut her arms and breasts with a razor blade. She had
spent years in various forms of therapy and had tried many dif ferent
medications, which had done little to help her deal with the imprints of her
horrendous past. She had also been admitted to several psychiatric hospitalsto manage her self-destructive behaviors, again without much apparent
benefit.
In our early therapy sessions, because Annie could only hint at what
she was feeling and thinking before she would shut down and freeze, we
focused on calming the physiological chaos within. W e used every
technique that I had learned over the years, like breathing with a focus on
the out breath, which activates the relaxing parasympathetic nervous
system. I also taught her to use her fingers to tap a sequence of acupressure
points on various parts of her body , a practice often taught under the name
EFT (Emotional Freedom T echnique), which has been shown to help
patients stay within the window of tolerance and often has positive ef fects
on PTSD symptoms.1
THE LEGACY OF INESCAP ABLE SHOCK
Because we can now identify the brain circuits involved in the alarm
system, we know , more or less, what was happening in Annie’ s brain as she
sat that first day in my waiting room: Her smoke detector , her amygdala,
had been rewired to interpret certain situations as harbingers of life-
threatening danger , and it was sending ur gent signals to her survival brain to
fight, freeze, or flee. Annie had all these reactions simultaneously—she was
visibly agitated and mentally shut down.
As we’ve seen, broken alarm systems can manifest in various ways,
and if your smoke detector malfunctions, you cannot trust the accuracy of
your perceptions. For example, when Annie started to like me she began to
look forward to our meetings, but she would arrive at my of fice in an
intense panic. One day she had a flashback of feeling excited that her father
was coming home soon—but later that evening he molested her . For the
first time, she realized that her mind automatically associated excitement
about seeing someone she loved with the terror of being molested.
Small children are particularly adept at compartmentalizing experience,
so that Annie’ s natural love for her father and her dread of his assaults were
held in separate states of consciousness. As an adult Annie blamed herself
for her abuse, because she believed that the loving, excited little girl she
once was had led her father on—that she had brought the molestation uponherself. Her rational mind told her this was nonsense, but this belief
emanated from deep within her emotional, survival brain, from the basic
wiring of her limbic system. It would not change until she felt safe enough
within her body to mindfully go back into that experience and truly know
how that little girl had felt and acted during the abuse.
THE NUMBING WITHIN
One of the ways the memory of helplessness is stored is as muscle tension
or feelings of disintegration in the af fected body areas: head, back, and
limbs in accident victims,  vagina and rectum in victims of sexual abuse.
The lives of many trauma survivors come to revolve around bracing against
and neutralizing unwanted sensory experiences, and most people I see in
my practice have become experts in such  self-numbing. They may become
serially obese or anorexic or addicted to exercise or work.  At least half of
all traumatized people try to dull their intolerable inner world with drugs or
alcohol. The flip side of numbing is sensation seeking. Many people cut
themselves to make the numbing go away , while others try bungee jumping
or high-risk activities like prostitution and gambling.  Any of these methods
can give them a false and paradoxical feeling of control.
When people are chronically angry or scared, constant muscle tension
ultimately leads to spasms, back pain, migraine headaches, fibromyalgia,
and other forms of chronic pain. They may visit multiple specialists,
under go extensive diagnostic tests, and be prescribed multiple medications,
some of which may provide temporary relief but all of which fail to address
the underlying issues. Their diagnosis will come to define their reality
without ever being identified as a symptom of their attempt to cope with
trauma.
The first two years of my therapy with Annie focused on helping her
learn to tolerate her physical sensations for what they were—just sensations
in the present, with a beginning, a middle, and an end. W e worked on
helping her stay calm enough to notice what she felt without judgment, so
she could observe these unbidden images and feelings as residues of a
terrible past and not as unending threats to her life today .Patients like Annie continuously challenge us to find new ways of
helping people  regulate their arousal and control their own physiology . That
is how my T rauma Center colleagues and I stumbled upon yoga.
FINDING OUR W A Y T O YOGA: BOTT OM-UP
REGULA TION
Our involvement with yoga started in 1998 when Jim Hopper and I first
heard about a new biological marker , heart rate variability (HR V), that had
recently been discovered to be a good measure of how well the autonomic
nervous system is working. As you’ll recall from chapter 5, the autonomic
nervous system is our brain’ s most elementary survival system, its two
branches regulating arousal throughout the body . Roughly speaking, the
sympathetic nervous system (SNS) uses chemicals like adrenaline to fuel
the body and brain to take action, while the parasympathetic nervous
system (PNS) uses acetylcholine to help regulate basic body functions like
digestion, wound healing, and sleep and dream cycles. When we’re at our
best, these two systems work closely together to keep us in an optimal state
of engagement with our environment and with ourselves.
Heart rate variability measures the relative balance between the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic systems. When we inhale, we
stimulate the SNS, which results in an increase in heart rate. Exhalations
stimulate the PNS, which decreases how fast the heart beats. In healthy
individuals inhalations and exhalations produce steady , rhythmical
fluctuations in heart rate: Good heart rate variability is a measure of basic
well-being.
Why is HR V important? When our autonomic nervous system is well
balanced, we have a reasonable degree of control over our response to
minor frustrations and disappointments, enabling us to calmly assess what
is going on when we feel insulted or left out. Ef fective arousal modulation
gives us control over our impulses and emotions: As long as we manage to
stay calm, we can choose how we want to respond. Individuals with poorly
modulated autonomic nervous systems are easily thrown of f balance, both
mentally and physically . Since the autonomic nervous system or ganizes
arousal in both body and brain, poor HR V—that is, a lack of fluctuation inheart rate in response to breathing—not only has negative ef fects on
thinking and feeling but also on how the body responds to stress. Lack of
coherence between breathing and heart rate makes people vulnerable to a
variety of physical illnesses, such as heart disease and cancer , in addition to
mental problems such as depression and PTSD.2
In order to study this issue further , we acquired a machine to measure
HR V and started to put bands around the chests of research subjects with
and without PTSD to record the depth and rhythm of their breathing while
little monitors attached to their earlobes picked up their pulse. After we’d
tested about sixty subjects, it became clear that people with PTSD have
unusually low HR V . In other words, in PTSD the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous systems are out of sync.3 This added a new twist
to the complicated trauma story: W e confirmed that yet another brain
regulatory system was not functioning as it should.4 Failure to keep this
system in balance is one explanation why traumatized people like Annie are
so vulnerable to overrespond to relatively minor stresses: The biological
systems that are meant to help us cope with the vagaries of life fail to meet
the challenge.
Our next scientific question was: Is there a way for people to improve
their HR V? I had a personal incentive to explore this question, as I had
discovered that my own HR V was not nearly robust enough to guarantee
long-term physical health. An Internet search turned up studies showing
that marathon running markedly increased HR V . Sadly , that was of little
use, since neither I nor our patients were good candidates for the Boston
Marathon. Google also listed seventeen thousand yoga sites claiming that
that yoga improved HR V , but we were unable to find any supporting
studies. Y ogis may have developed a wonderful method to help people find
internal balance and health, but back in 1998 not much work had been done
on evaluating their claims with the tools of the W estern medical tradition.
Heart rate variability (HR V) in a well-r egulated person.  The rising and falling black lines
represent breathing, in this case slow and regular inhalations and exhalations. The gray area
shows fluctuations in heart rate. Whenever this individual inhales, his heart rate goes up;
during exhalations the heart slows down. This pattern of heart rate variability reflects excellent
physiological health.
Responding to upset.  When someone remembers an upsetting experience, breathing speeds up
and becomes irregular , as does heart rate. Heart and breath no longer stay perfectly in sync.
This is a normal response.
HR V in PTSD.  Breathing is rapid and shallow . Heart rate is slow and out of synch with the
breath. This is a typical pattern of a shut-down person with chronic PTSD.
A person with chr onic PTSD r eliving a trauma memory .  Breathing initially is labored and
deep, typical of a panic reaction. The heart races out of synch with the breath. This is followed
by rapid, shallow breathing and slow heart rate, signs that the person is shutting down.
Since then, however , scientific methods have confirmed that changing
the way one breathes can improve problems with anger , depression, and
anxiety5 and that yoga can positively af fect such wide-ranging medical
problems as high blood pressure, elevated stress hormone secretion,6
asthma, and low-back pain.7 However , no psychiatric journal had published
a scientific study of yoga for PTSD until our own work appeared in 2014.8As it happened, a few days after our Internet search a lanky yoga
teacher named David Emerson walked through the front door of the T rauma
Center . He told us that he’d developed a modified form of hatha yoga to
deal with PTSD and that he’d been holding classes for veterans at a local
vet center and for women in the Boston Area Rape Crisis Center . W ould we
be interested in working with him? Dave’ s visit eventually grew into a very
active yoga program, and in due course we received the first grant from the
National Institutes of Health to study the ef fects of yoga on PTSD. Dave’ s
work also contributed to my developing my own regular yoga practice and
becoming a frequent teacher at Kripalu, a yoga center in the Berkshire
Mountains in western Massachusetts. (Along the way , my own HR V pattern
improved as well.)
In choosing to explore yoga to improve HR V we were taking an
expansive approach to the problem. W e could simply have used any of a
number of reasonably priced handheld devices that train people to slow
their breathing and synchronize it with their heart rate, resulting in a state of
“cardiac coherence” like the pattern shown in the first illustration above.9
T oday there are a variety of apps that can help improve HR V with the aid of
a smartphone.10 In our clinic we have workstations where patients can train
their HR V , and I ur ge all my patients who, for one reason or another , cannot
practice yoga, martial arts, or qigong to train themselves at home. (See
Resources for more information.)
EXPLORING YOGA
Our decision to study yoga led us deeper into trauma’ s impact on the body .
Our first experimental yoga classes met in a room generously donated by a
nearby studio. David Emerson and his colleagues  Dana Moore and Jodi
Carey volunteered as instructors, and my research team figured out how we
could best measure yoga’ s ef fects on psychological functioning. W e put
flyers in neighborhood supermarkets and laundromats to advertise our
classes and interviewed dozens of people who called in response.
Ultimately we selected thirty-seven women who had severe trauma histories
and who had already received many years of therapy without much benefit.
Half the volunteers were selected at random for the yoga group, while theothers would receive a well-established mental health treatment, dialectical
behavior therapy (DBT), which teaches people how to apply mindfulness to
stay calm and in control. Finally , we commissioned an engineer at MIT to
build us a complicated computer that could measure HR V simultaneously in
eight dif ferent people. (In each study group there were multiple classes,
each with no more than eight participants.) While yoga significantly
improved arousal problems in PTSD and dramatically improved our
subjects’ relationships to their bodies (“I now take care of my body”; “I
listen to what my body needs”), eight weeks of DBT did not af fect their
arousal levels or PTSD symptoms. Thus, our interest in yoga gradually
evolved from a focus on learning whether yoga can change HR V (which it
can)1 1 to helping traumatized people learn to comfortably inhabit their
tortured bodies.
Over time we also started a yoga program for marines at Camp Lejeune
and have worked successfully with various other programs to implement
yoga programs for veterans with PTSD. Even though we have no formal
research data on the veterans, it looks as if yoga is at least as ef fective for
them as it has been for the women in our studies.
All yoga programs consist of a combination of breath practices
( pranayama ), stretches or postures ( asanas ), and meditation. Dif ferent
schools of yoga emphasize variations in intensity and focus within these
core components. For example, variations in the speed and depth of
breathing  and use of the mouth, nostrils, and throat all produce dif ferent
results, and some techniques have powerful ef fects on ener gy .12 In our
classes we keep the approach simple. Many of our patients are barely aware
of their breath, so learning to focus on the in and out breath, to notice
whether the breath was fast or slow , and to count breaths in some poses can
be a significant accomplishment.13
W e gradually introduce a limited number of classic postures. The
emphasis is not on getting the poses “right” but on helping the participants
notice which muscles are active at dif ferent times. The sequences are
designed to create a rhythm between tension and relaxation—something we
hope they will begin to perceive in their day-to-day lives.
W e do not teach meditation as such, but we do foster mindfulness by
encouraging students to observe what is happening in dif ferent parts of thebody from pose to pose. In our studies we keep seeing how dif ficult it is for
traumatized people to feel completely relaxed and physically safe in their
bodies. W e measure our subjects’ HR V by placing tiny monitors on their
arms during shavasana , the pose at the end of most classes during which
practitioners lie face up, palms up, arms and legs relaxed. Instead of
relaxation we picked up too much muscle activity to get a clear signal.
Rather than going into a state of quiet repose, our students’ muscles often
continue to prepare them to fight unseen enemies. A major challenge in
recovering from trauma remains being able to achieve a state of total
relaxation and safe surrender .
LEARNING SELF-REGULA TION
After seeing the success of our pilot studies, we established a therapeutic
yoga program at the T rauma Center . I thought that this might be an
opportunity for Annie to develop a more caring relationship with her body ,
and I ur ged her to try it. The first class was dif ficult. Merely being given an
adjustment by the instructor was so terrifying that she went home and
slashed herself—her malfunctioning alarm system interpreted even a gentle
touch on her back as an assault. At the same time Annie realized that yoga
might of fer her a way to liberate herself from the constant sense of danger
that she felt in her body . W ith my encouragement she returned the following
week.
Annie had always found it easier to write about her experiences than to
talk about them. After her second yoga class she wrote to me: “I don’ t know
all of the reasons that yoga terrifies me so much, but I do know that it will
be an incredible source of healing for me and that is why I am working on
myself to try it. Y oga is about looking inward instead of outward and
listening to my body , and a lot of my survival has been geared around never
doing those things. Going to the class today my heart was racing and part of
me really wanted to turn around, but then I just kept putting one foot in
front of the other until I got to the door and went in. After the class I came
home and slept for four hours. This week I tried doing yoga at home and the
words came to me ‘Y our body has things to say .’ I said back to myself, ‘I
will try and listen.’”A few days later Annie wrote: “Some thoughts during and after yoga
today . It occurred to me how disconnected I must be from my body when I
cut it. When I was doing the poses I noticed that my jaw and the whole area
from where my legs end to my bellybutton is where I am tight, tense and
holding the pain and memories. Sometimes you have asked me where I feel
things and I can’ t even begin to locate them, but today I felt those places
very clearly and it made me want to cry in a gentle kind of way .”
The following month both of us went on vacation and, invited to stay in
touch, Annie wrote to me again: “I’ve been doing yoga on my own in a
room that overlooks the lake. I’m continuing to read the book you lent me
[Stephen Cope’ s wonderful Y oga and the Quest for the T rue Self ]. It’ s really
interesting to think about how much I have been refusing to listen to my
body , which is such an important part of who I am. Y esterday when I did
yoga I thought about letting my body tell me the story it wants to tell and in
the hip opening poses there was a lot of pain and sadness. I don’ t think my
mind is going to let really vivid images come up as long as I am away from
home, which is good. I think now about how unbalanced I have been and
about how hard I have tried to deny the past, which is a part of my true self.
There is so much I can learn if I am open to it and then I won’ t have to fight
myself every minute of every day .”
One of the hardest yoga positions for Annie to tolerate was one that’ s
often called Happy Baby , in which you lie on your back with your knees
deeply bent and the soles of your feet pointing to the ceiling, while holding
your toes with your hands. This rotates the pelvis into a wide-open position.
It’ s easy to understand why this would make a rape victim feel extremely
vulnerable. Y et, as long as Happy Baby (or any posture that resembles it)
precipitates intense panic, it is dif ficult to be intimate. Learning how to
comfortably assume Happy Baby is a challenge for many patients in our
yoga classes.
GETTING T O KNOW ME: CUL TIV A TING
INTEROCEPTION
One of the clearest lessons from contemporary neuroscience is that our
sense of ourselves is anchored in a vital connection with our bodies.14 W edo not truly know ourselves unless we can feel and interpret our physical
sensations; we need to register and act on these sensations to navigate
safely through life.15 While numbing (or compensatory sensation seeking)
may make life tolerable, the price you pay is that you lose awareness of
what is going on inside your body and, with that, the sense of being fully ,
sensually alive.
In chapter 6 I discussed alexithymia, the technical term for not being
able to identify what is going on inside oneself.16 People who suf fer from
alexithymia tend to feel physically uncomfortable but cannot describe
exactly what the problem is. As a result they often have multiple vague and
distressing physical complaints that doctors can’ t diagnose. In addition,
they can’ t figure out for themselves what they’re really feeling about any
given situation or what makes them feel better or worse. This is the result of
numbing, which keeps them from anticipating and responding to the
ordinary demands of their bodies in quiet, mindful ways. At the same time,
it muf fles the everyday sensory delights of experiences like music, touch,
and light, which imbue life with value. Y oga turned out to be a terrific way
to (re)gain a relationship with the interior world and with it a caring, loving,
sensual relationship to the self.
If you are not aware of what your body needs, you can’ t take care of it.
If you don’ t feel hunger , you can’ t nourish yourself. If you mistake anxiety
for hunger , you may eat too much. And if you can’ t feel when you’re
satiated, you’ll keep eating. This is why cultivating sensory awareness is
such a critical aspect of trauma recovery . Most traditional therapies
downplay or ignore the moment-to-moment shifts in our inner sensory
world. But these shifts carry the essence of the or ganism’ s responses: the
emotional states that are imprinted in the body’ s chemical profile, in the
viscera, in the contraction of the striated muscles of the face, throat, trunk,
and limbs.17 T raumatized people need to learn that they can tolerate their
sensations, befriend their inner experiences, and cultivate new action
patterns.
In yoga you focus your attention on your breathing and on your
sensations moment to moment. Y ou begin to notice the connection between
your emotions and your body—perhaps how anxiety about doing a pose
actually throws you of f balance. Y ou begin to experiment with changing theway you feel. W ill taking a deep breath relieve that tension in your
shoulder? W ill focusing on your exhalations produce a sense of calm?18
Simply noticing what you feel fosters emotional regulation, and it helps
you to stop trying to ignore what is going on inside you. As I often tell my
students, the two most important phrases in therapy , as in yoga, are “Notice
that” and “What happens next?” Once you start approaching your body with
curiosity rather than with fear , everything shifts.
Body awareness also changes your sense of time. T rauma makes you
feel as if you are stuck forever in a helpless state of horror . In yoga you
learn that sensations rise to a peak and then fall. For example, if an
instructor invites you to enter a particularly challenging position, you may
at first feel a sense of defeat or resistance, anticipating that you won’ t be
able to tolerate the feelings brought up by this particular position. A good
yoga teacher will encourage you to just notice any tension while timing
what you feel with the flow of your breath: “W e’ll be holding this position
for ten breaths.” This helps you anticipate the end of discomfort and
strengthens your capacity to deal with physical and emotional distress.
A wareness that all experience is transitory changes your perspective on
yourself.
This is not to say that regaining interoception isn’ t potentially
upsetting. What happens when a newly accessed feeling in your chest is
experienced as rage, or fear , or anxiety? In our first yoga study we had a 50
percent dropout rate, the highest of any study we’d ever done. When we
interviewed the patients who’d left, we learned that they had found the
program too intense: Any posture that involved the pelvis could precipitate
intense panic or even flashbacks to sexual assaults. Intense physical
sensations unleashed the demons from the past that had been so carefully
kept in check by numbing and inattention. This taught us to go slow , often
at a snail’ s pace. That approach paid of f: In our most recent study only one
out of thirty-four participants did not finish.Effects of a weekly yoga class.  After twenty weeks, chronically traumatized women
developed increased activation of critical brain structures involved in self-regulation: the insula
and the medial prefrontal cortex.
YOGA AND THE NEUROSCIENCE OF SELF-A W ARENESS
During the past few years brain researchers such as my colleagues Sara
Lazar and Britta Hölzel at Harvard have shown that intensive meditation
has a positive ef fect on exactly those brain areas that are critical for
physiological self-regulation.19 In our latest yoga study , with six women
with histories of profound early trauma, we also found the first indications
that twenty weeks of yoga practice increased activation of the basic self-
system, the insula and the medial prefrontal cortex (see chapter 6). This
research needs much more work, but it opens up new perspectives on how
actions that involve noticing and befriending the sensations in our bodies
can produce profound changes in both mind and brain that can lead to
healing from trauma.After each of our yoga studies, we asked the participants what ef fect
the classes had had on them. W e never mentioned the insula or
interoception; in fact, we kept the discussion and explanation to a minimum
so that they could focus inward.
Here is a sample of their responses:
“My emotions feel more powerful. Maybe it’ s just that I can
recognize them now .”
“I can express my feelings more because I can recognize them
more. I feel them in my body , recognize them, and address
them.”
“I now see choices, multiple paths. I can decide and I can
choose my life, it doesn’ t have to be repeated or be experienced
like a child.”
“I was able to move my body and be in my body in a safe place
and without hurting myself/getting hurt.”
LEARNING T O COMMUNICA TE
People who feel safe in their bodies can begin to translate the memories that
previously overwhelmed them into language.  After Annie had been
practicing yoga three times a week for about a year , she noticed that she
was able to talk much more freely to me about what had happened to her .
She thought this almost miraculous. One day , when she knocked over a
glass of water , I got up from my chair and approached her with a Kleenex
box, saying, “Let me clean that up.” This precipitated a brief, intense panic
reaction. She was quickly able to contain herself, though, and explained
why those particular words were so upsetting to her—they were what her
father would say after he’d raped her . Annie wrote to me after that session:
“Did you notice that I have been able to say the words out loud? I didn’ t
have to write them down to tell you what was happening. I didn’ t lose trust
in you because you said words that triggered me. I understood that the
words were a trigger and not terrible words that no one should say .”
Annie continues to practice yoga and to write to me about her
experiences: “T oday I went to a morning yoga class at my new yoga studio.The teacher talked about breathing to the edge of where we can and then
noticing that edge. She said that if we notice our breath we are in the
present because we can’ t breathe in the future or the past. It felt so amazing
to me to be practicing breathing in that way after we had just talked about
it, like I had been given a gift. Some of the poses can be triggering for me.
T wo of them were today , one where your legs are up frog like and one
where you are doing really deep breathing into your pelvis. I felt the
beginning of panic, especially in the breathing pose, like oh no that’ s not a
part of my body I want to feel. But then I was able to stop myself and just
say , notice that this part of your body is holding experiences and then just
let it go. Y ou don’ t have to stay there but you don’ t have to leave either , just
use it as information. I don’ t know that I have ever been able to do that in
such a conscious way before. It made me think that if I notice without being
so afraid, it will be easier for me to believe myself.”
In another message, Annie reflected on the changes in her life: “I
slowly learned to just have my feelings, without being hijacked by them.
Life is more manageable: I am more attuned to my day and more present in
the moment. I am more tolerant of physical touch. My husband and I are
enjoying watching movies cuddled together in bed . . . a huge step. All this
helped me finally feel intimate with my husband.”IC H A P T E R  1 7
P U T T I N G  T H E  P I E C E S  T O G E T H E R :
S E L F - L E A D E R S H I P
This being human is a guest house. Every morning is a new
arrival. A joy , a depression, a meanness, some momentary
awareness comes as an unexpected visitor . . . . W elcome and
entertain them all. T reat each guest honorably . The dark thought,
the shame, the malice, meet them at the door laughing, and invite
them in. Be grateful for whoever comes, because each has been
sent as a guide from beyond.
—Rumi
A man has as many social selves as there are individuals who
recognize him.
—W illiam James, The Principles of Psychology
t was early in my career , and I had been seeing Mary , a shy , lonely , and
physically collapsed young woman, for about three months in weekly
psychotherapy , dealing with the ravages of her terrible history of early
abuse. One day I opened the door to my waiting room and saw her standing
there provocatively , dressed in a miniskirt, her hair dyed flaming red, with a
cup of cof fee in one hand and a snarl on her face. “Y ou must be Dr . van der
Kolk,” she said. “My name is Jane, and I came to warn you not to believeany the lies that Mary has been telling you. Can I come in and tell you
about her?” I was stunned but fortunately kept myself from confronting
“Jane” and instead heard her out. Over the course of our session I met not
only Jane but also a hurt little girl and an angry male adolescent. That was
the beginning of a long and productive treatment.
Mary was my first encounter with  dissociative identity disorder (DID),
which at that time was called multiple personality disorder . As dramatic as
its symptoms are, the internal splitting and emer gence of distinct identities
experienced in DID represent only the extreme end of the spectrum of
mental life. The sense of being inhabited by warring impulses or parts is
common to all of us but particularly to traumatized people who had to resort
to extreme measures in order to survive. Exploring—even befriending—
those parts is an important component of healing.
DESPERA TE TIMES REQUIRE DESPERA TE MEASURES
W e all know what happens when we feel humiliated: W e put all our ener gy
into protecting ourselves, developing whatever survival strategies we can.
W e may repress our feelings; we may get furious and plot revenge. W e may
decide to become so powerful and successful that nobody can ever hurt us
again.  Many behaviors that are classified as psychiatric problems, including
some obsessions, compulsions, and panic attacks, as well as most self-
destructive behaviors, started out as strategies for self-protection. These
adaptations to trauma can so interfere with the capacity to function that
health-care providers and patients themselves often believe that full
recovery is beyond reach. V iewing these symptoms as permanent
disabilities narrows the focus of treatment to finding the proper drug
regimen, which can lead to lifelong dependence—as though trauma
survivors were like kidney patients on dialysis.1
It is much more productive to see aggression or depression, arrogance
or passivity as learned behaviors: Somewhere along the line, the patient
came to believe that he or she could survive only if he or she was tough,
invisible, or absent, or that it was safer to give up. Like traumatic memories
that keep intruding until they are laid to rest, traumatic adaptations continueuntil the human or ganism feels safe and integrates all the parts of itself that
are stuck in fighting or warding of f the trauma.
Every trauma survivor I’ve met is resilient in his or her own way , and
every one of their stories inspires awe at how people cope. Knowing how
much ener gy the sheer act of survival requires keeps me from being
surprised at the price they often pay: the absence of a loving relationship
with their own bodies, minds, and souls.
Coping takes its toll. For many children it is safer to hate themselves
than to risk their relationship with their caregivers by expressing anger or
by running away . As a result, abused children are likely to grow up
believing that they are fundamentally unlovable; that  was the only way their
young minds could explain why they were treated so badly . They survive by
denying, ignoring, and splitting of f lar ge chunks of reality: They for get the
abuse; they suppress their rage or despair; they numb their physical
sensations. If you were abused as a child, you are likely to have a childlike
part living inside you that is frozen in time, still holding fast to this kind of
self-loathing and denial. Many adults who survive terrible experiences are
caught in the same trap. Pushing away intense feelings can be highly
adaptive in the short run. It may help you preserve your dignity and
independence; it may help you maintain focus on critical tasks like saving a
comrade, taking care of your kids, or rebuilding your house.
The problems come later . After seeing a friend blown up, a soldier may
return to civilian life and try to put the experience out of his mind. A
protective part of him knows how to be competent at his job and how to get
along with colleagues. But he may habitually erupt in rage at his girlfriend
or become numb and frozen when the pleasure of surrendering to her touch
makes him feel he is losing control. He probably will not be aware that his
mind automatically associates passive surrender with the paralysis he felt
when his friend was killed. So another protective part steps in to create a
diversion: He gets angry and, having no idea what set him of f, he thinks
he’ s mad about something his girlfriend did. Of course, if he keeps blowing
up at her (and subsequent girlfriends), he will become more and more
isolated. But he may never realize that a traumatized part is triggered by
passivity and that another part, an angry manager , is stepping in to protect
that vulnerable part. Helping these parts to give up their extreme beliefs is
how therapy can save people’ s lives.As we saw in chapter 13, a central task for recovery from trauma is to
learn to live with the memories of the past without being overwhelmed by
them in the present. But most survivors, including those who are
functioning well—even brilliantly—in some aspects of their lives, face
another , even greater challenge: reconfiguring a brain/mind system that was
constructed to cope with the worst. Just as we need to revisit traumatic
memories in order to integrate them, we need to revisit the parts of
ourselves that developed the defensive habits that helped us to survive.
THE MIND IS A MOSAIC
W e all have parts. Right now a part of me feels like taking a nap; another
part wants to keep writing. Still feeling injured by an of fensive e-mail
message, a part of me wants to hit “reply” on a stinging put-down, while a
dif ferent part wants to shrug it of f. Most people who know me have seen
my intense, sincere, and irritable parts; some have met the little snarling
dog that lives inside me. My children reminisce about going on family
vacations with my playful and adventurous parts.
When you walk into the of fice in the morning and see the storm clouds
over your boss’ s head, you know precisely what is coming. That angry part
has a characteristic tone of voice, vocabulary , and body posture—so
dif ferent from yesterday , when you shared pictures of your kids. Parts are
not just feelings but distinct ways of being, with their own beliefs, agendas,
and roles in the overall ecology of our lives.
How well we get along with ourselves depends lar gely on our internal
leadership skills—how well we listen to our dif ferent parts, make sure they
feel taken care of, and keep them from sabotaging one another . Parts often
come across as absolutes when in fact they represent only one element in a
complex constellation of thoughts, emotions, and sensations. If Mar garet
shouts, “I hate you!” in the middle of an ar gument, Joe probably thinks she
despises him—and in that moment Mar garet might agree. But in fact only a
part of her is angry , and that part temporarily obscures her generous and
af fectionate feelings, which may well return when she sees the devastation
on Joe’ s face.Every major school of psychology recognizes that people have
subpersonalities and gives them dif ferent names.2 In 1890 W illiam James
wrote: “[I]t must be admitted that . . . the total possible consciousness may
be split into parts which coexist, but mutually ignore each other , and share
the objects of knowledge between them.”3 Carl Jung wrote: “The psyche is
a self-regulating system that maintains its equilibrium just as the body
does,”4 “The natural state of the human psyche consists in a jostling
together of its components and in their contradictory behavior ,”5 and “The
reconciliation of these opposites is a major problem. Thus, the adversary is
none other than ‘the other in me.’”6
Modern neuroscience has confirmed this notion of the mind as a kind
of society . Michael Gazzaniga, who conducted pioneering split-brain
research, concluded that the mind is composed of semiautonomous
functioning modules, each of which has a special role.7 In his book The
Social Brain (1985) he writes, “But what of the idea that the self is not a
unified being, and there may exist within us several realms of
consciousness? . . . From our [split-brain] studies the new idea emer ges that
there are literally several selves, and they do not necessarily ‘converse’ with
each other internally .”8 MIT scientist Marvin Minsky , a pioneer of artificial
intelligence, declared: “The legend of the single Self can only divert us
from the tar get of that inquiry .9 . . . [I]t can make sense to think there exists,
inside your brain, a society of dif ferent minds. Like members of a family ,
the dif ferent minds can work together to help each other , each still having
its own mental experiences that the others never know about.”10
Therapists who are trained to see people as complex human beings with
multiple characteristics and potentialities can help them explore their
system of inner parts and take care of the wounded facets of themselves.
There are several such treatment approaches, including the structural
dissociation model developed by my Dutch colleagues Onno van der Hart
and Ellert Nijenhuis and Atlanta-based Kathy Steel, that is widely practiced
in Europe and Richard Kluft’ s work in the United States.1 1
T wenty years after working with Mary , I met Richard Schwartz, the
developer of internal family systems therapy (IFS). It was through his work
that Minsky’ s “family” metaphor truly came to life for me and of fered a
systematic way to work with the split-of f parts that result from trauma. Atthe core of IFS is the notion that the mind of each of us is like a family in
which the members have dif ferent levels of maturity , excitability , wisdom,
and pain. The parts form a network or system in which change in any one
part will af fect all the others.
The IFS model helped me realize that dissociation occurs on a
continuum. In trauma the self-system breaks down, and parts of the self
become polarized and go to war with one another . Self-loathing coexists
(and fights) with grandiosity; loving care with hatred; numbing and
passivity with rage and aggression. These extreme parts bear the burden of
the trauma.
In IFS a part is considered not just a passing emotional state or
customary thought pattern but a distinct mental system with its own history ,
abilities, needs, and worldview .12 T rauma injects parts with beliefs and
emotions that hijack them out of their naturally valuable state. For example,
we all have parts that are childlike and fun. When we are abused, these are
the parts that are hurt the most, and they become frozen, carrying the pain,
terror , and betrayal of abuse. This burden makes them toxic—parts of
ourselves that we need to deny at all costs. Because they are locked away
inside, IFS calls them the exiles.
At this point other parts or ganize to protect the internal family from the
exiles. These protectors keep the toxic parts away , but in so doing they take
on some of the ener gy of the abuser . Critical and perfectionistic managers
can make sure we never get close to anyone or drive us to be relentlessly
productive. Another group of protectors, which IFS calls fir efighters , are
emer gency responders, acting impulsively whenever an experience triggers
an exiled emotion.
Each split-of f part holds dif ferent memories, beliefs, and physical
sensations; some hold the shame, others the rage, some the pleasure and
excitement, another the intense loneliness or the abject compliance. These
are all aspects of the abuse experience. The critical insight is that all these
parts have a function: to protect the self from feeling the full terror of
annihilation.
Children who act out their pain rather than locking it down are often
diagnosed with “oppositional defiant behavior ,” “attachment disorder ,” or
“conduct disorder .” But these labels ignore the fact that rage andwithdrawal are only facets of a whole range of desperate attempts at
survival. T rying to control a child’ s behavior while failing to address the
underlying issue—the abuse—leads to treatments that are inef fective at best
and harmful at worst. As they grow up, their parts do not spontaneously
integrate into a coherent personality but continue to lead a relatively
autonomous existence.
Parts that are “out” may be entirely unaware of the other parts of the
system.13 Most of the men I evaluated with regard to their childhood
molestation by Catholic priests took anabolic steroids and spent an
inordinate amount of time in the gym pumping iron. These compulsive
bodybuilders lived in a masculine culture of sweat, football, and beer ,
where weakness and fear were carefully concealed. Only after they felt safe
with me did I meet the terrified kids inside.
Patients may also dislike the parts that are out: the parts that are angry ,
destructive, or critical. But IFS of fers a framework for understanding them
—and, also important, talking about them in a nonpathologizing way .
Recognizing that each part is stuck with burdens from the past and
respecting its function in the overall system makes it feel less threatening or
overwhelming.
As Schwartz states: “If one accepts the basic idea that people have an
innate drive toward nurturing their own health, this implies that, when
people have chronic problems, something gets in the way of accessing inner
resources. Recognizing this, the role of therapists is to collaborate rather
than to teach, confront, or fill holes in your psyche.”14 The first step in this
collaboration is to assure the internal system that all parts are welcome and
that all of them—even those that are suicidal or destructive—were formed
in an attempt to protect the self-system, no matter how much they now
seem to threaten it.
SELF-LEADERSHIP
IFS recognizes that the cultivation of mindful self-leadership is the
foundation for healing from trauma. Mindfulness not only makes it possible
to survey our internal landscape with compassion and curiosity but can also
actively steer us in the right direction for self-care. All systems—families,or ganizations, or nations—can operate ef fectively only if they have clearly
defined and competent leadership. The internal family is no dif ferent: All
facets of our selves need to be attended to. The internal leader must wisely
distribute the available resources and supply a vision for the whole that
takes all the parts into account.
As Richard Schwartz explains:
The internal system of an abuse victim differs fr om the non-abuse
system with r egar d to the consistent absence of effective
leadership, the extr eme rules under which the parts function, and
the absence of any consistent balance or harmony . T ypically , the
parts operate ar ound outdated assumptions and beliefs derived
fr om the childhood abuse, believing, for example, that it is still
extr emely danger ous to r eveal secr ets about childhood experiences
which wer e endur ed.15
What happens when the self is no longer in char ge? IFS calls this
“blending”: a condition in which the Self identifies with a part, as in “I want
to kill myself” or “I hate you.” Notice the dif ference from “A part of me
wishes that I were dead” or “A part of me gets triggered when you do that
and makes me want to kill you.”
Schwartz makes two assertions that extend the concept of mindfulness
into the realm of active leadership. The first is that this Self does not need
to be cultivated or developed. Beneath the surface of the protective parts of
trauma survivors there exists an undamaged essence, a Self that is
confident, curious, and calm, a Self that has been sheltered from destruction
by the various protectors that have emer ged in their ef forts to ensure
survival. Once those protectors trust that it is safe to separate, the Self will
spontaneously emer ge, and the parts can be enlisted in the healing process.
The second assumption is that, rather than being a passive observer ,
this mindful Self can help reor ganize the inner system and communicate
with the parts in ways that help those parts trust that there is someone inside
who can handle things. Again neuroscience research shows that this is not
just a metaphor . Mindfulness increases activation of the medial prefrontal
cortex and decreases activation of structures like the amygdala that triggerour emotional responses. This increases our control over the emotional
brain.
Even more than encouraging a relationship between a therapist and a
helpless patient, IFS focuses on cultivating an inner relationship between
the Self and the various protective parts. In this model of treatment the Self
doesn’ t only witness or passively observe, as in some meditation traditions;
it has an active leadership role. The Self is like an orchestra conductor who
helps all the parts to function harmoniously as a symphony rather than a
cacophony .
GETTING T O KNOW THE INTERNAL LANDSCAPE
The task of the therapist is to help patients separate this confusing blend
into separate entities, so that they are able to say: “This part of me is like a
little child, and that part of me is more mature but feels like a victim.” They
might not like many of these parts, but identifying them makes them less
intimidating or overwhelming. The next step is to encourage patients to
simply ask each protective part as it emer ges to “stand back” temporarily so
that we can see what it is protecting. When this is done again and again, the
parts begin to unblend from the Self and make space for mindful self-
observation. Patients learn to put their fear , rage, or disgust on hold and
open up into states of curiosity and self-reflection. From the stable
perspective of Self they can begin constructive inner dialogues with their
parts.
Patients are asked to identify the part involved in the current problem,
like feeling worthless, abandoned, or obsessed with vengeful thoughts. As
they ask themselves, “What inside me feels that way?” an image may come
to mind.16 Maybe the depressed part looks like an abandoned child, or an
aging man, or an overwhelmed nurse taking care of the wounded; a
vengeful part might appear as a combat marine or a member of a street
gang.
Next the therapist asks, “How do you feel toward that (sad, vengeful,
terrified) part of you?” This sets the stage for mindful self-observation by
separating the “you” from the part in question. If the patient has an extreme
response like “I hate it,” the therapist knows that there is another protectivepart blended with Self. He or she might then ask, “See if the part that hates
it would step back.” Then the protective part is often thanked for its
vigilance and assured that it can return anytime that it is needed. If the
protective part is willing, the follow-up question is: “How do you feel
toward the (previously rejected) part now?” The patient is likely to say
something like “I wonder why it is so (sad, vengeful etc.).” This sets the
stage for getting to know the part better—for example, by inquiring how old
it is and how it came to feel the way it does.
Once a patient manifests a critical mass of Self, this kind of dialogue
begins to take place spontaneously . At this point it’ s important for the
therapist to step aside and just keep an eye out for other parts that might
interfere, or make occasional empathic comments, or ask questions like
“What do you say to the part about that?” or “Where do you want to go
now?” or “What feels like the right next step?” as well as the ubiquitous
Self-detecting question, “How do you feel toward the part now?”
A LIFE IN P AR TS
Joan came to see me to help her manage her uncontrollable temper tantrums
and to deal with her guilt about her numerous af fairs, most recently with her
tennis coach. As she put it in our first session: “I go from being a kick-ass
professional woman to a whimpering child, to a furious bitch, to a pitiless
eating machine in the course of ten minutes. I have no idea which of these I
really am.”
By this point in the session, Joan had already critiqued the prints on my
wall, my rickety furniture, and my messy desk. Of fense was her best
defense. She was preparing to get hurt again—I’d probably let her down, as
so many people had before. She knew that for therapy to work, she’d have
to make herself vulnerable, so she had to find out if I could tolerate her
anger , fear , and sorrow . I realized that the only way to counter her
defensiveness was by showing a high level of interest in the details of her
life, demonstrating unwavering support for the risk she took in talking with
me, and accepting the parts she was most ashamed of.
I asked Joan if she had noticed the part of herself that was critical. She
acknowledged that she had, and I asked her how she felt toward that critic.This key question allowed her to begin to separate from that part and to
access her Self. Joan responded that she hated the critic, because it
reminded her of her mother . When I asked her what that critical part might
be protecting, her anger subsided, and she became more curious and
thoughtful: “I wonder why she finds it necessary to call me some of the
same names that my mother used to call me, and worse.” She talked about
how scared she had been of her mom growing up and how she felt that she
never could do anything right. The critic was obviously a manager: Not
only was it protecting Joan from me, but it was trying to preempt her
mother ’ s criticism.
Over the next few weeks Joan told me that she had been sexually
molested by her mother ’ s boyfriend, probably around the time she was in
the first or second grade. She thought she’d been “ruined” for intimate
relationships. While she was demanding and critical of her husband, for
whom she lacked any sexual desire, she was passionate and reckless in her
love af fairs. But the af fairs always ended in a similar way: In the middle of
a lovemaking session, she would suddenly become terrified and curl up into
a ball, whimpering like a little girl. These scenes left her confused and
disgusted, and afterward she could not bear to have anything more to do
with her lover .
Like Marilyn in chapter 8, Joan told me that she had learned to make
herself disappear when she was being molested, floating above the scene as
if it were happening to some other girl. Pushing the molestation out of her
mind had enabled Joan to have a normal school life of sleepovers,
girlfriends, and team sports. The trouble began in adolescence, when she
developed her pattern of frigid contempt for boys who treated her well and
having casual sex that left her humiliated and ashamed. She told me that
bulimia for her was what or gasms must be for other people, and having sex
with her husband for her was what vomiting must be for others. While
specific memories of her abuse were split of f (dissociated), she unwittingly
kept reenacting it.
I did not try to explain to her why she felt so angry , guilty , or shut down
—she already thought of herself as damaged goods. In therapy , as in
memory processing, pendulation—the gradual approach that I discussed in
chapter 13—is central. For Joan to be able to deal with her misery and hurt,we would have to recruit her own strength and self-love, enabling her to
heal herself.
This meant focusing on her many inner resources and reminding myself
that I could not provide her with the love and caring she had missed as a
child. If, as a therapist, teacher , or mentor , you try to fill the holes of early
deprivation, you come up against the fact that you are the wrong person, at
the wrong time, in the wrong place. The therapy would focus on Joan’ s
relationship with her parts rather than with me.
MEETING THE MANAGERS
As Joan’ s treatment progressed, we identified many dif ferent parts that were
in char ge at dif ferent times: an aggressive childlike part that threw tantrums,
a promiscuous adolescent part, a suicidal part, an obsessive manager , a
prissy moralist, and so on. As usual, we met the managers first. Their job
was to prevent humiliation and abandonment and to keep her or ganized and
safe. Some managers may be aggressive, like Joan’ s critic, while others are
perfectionistic or reserved, careful not to draw too much attention to
themselves. They may tell us to turn a blind eye to what is going on and
keep us passive to avoid risk. Internal managers also control how much
access we have to emotions, so that the self-system doesn’ t get
overwhelmed.
It requires an enormous amount of ener gy to keep the system under
control. A single flirtatious comment may trigger several parts
simultaneously: one that becomes intensely sexually aroused, another filled
with self-loathing, a third that tries to calm things down by self-cutting.
Other managers create obsessions and distractions or deny reality
altogether . But each part should be approached as an internal protector who
maintains an important defensive position. Managers carry huge burdens of
responsibility and usually are in over their heads.
Some managers are extremely competent. Many of my patients hold
responsible positions, do outstanding professional jobs, and can be superbly
attentive parents. Joan’ s critical manager undoubtedly contributed to her
success as an ophthalmologist. I have had numerous patients who were
highly skilled teachers or nurses. While their colleagues may haveexperienced them as a bit distant or reserved, they would probably have
been astonished to discover that their exemplary coworkers engaged in self-
mutilation, eating disorders, or bizarre sexual practices.
Gradually Joan started to realize that it is normal to simultaneously
experience conflicting feelings or thoughts, which gave her more
confidence to face the task ahead. Instead of believing that hate consumed
her entire being, she learned that only a part of her felt paralyzed by it.
However , after a negative evaluation at work Joan went into a tailspin,
berating herself for not protecting herself, then feeling clingy , weak, and
powerless. When I asked her to see where that powerless part was located
in her body and how she felt toward it, she resisted. She told me she
couldn’ t stand that whiny , incompetent girl who made her feel embarrassed
and contemptuous of herself. I suspected that this part held much of the
memory of her abuse, and I decided not to pressure her at this point. She
left my of fice withdrawn and upset.
The next day she raided the refrigerator and then spent hours vomiting
up her food. When she returned to my of fice, she told me she wanted to kill
herself and was surprised that I seemed genuinely curious and
nonjudgmental and that I did not condemn her for either her bulimia or her
suicidality . When I asked her what parts were involved, the critic came back
and blurted out, “She is disgusting.” When she asked that part to step back,
the next part said: “Nobody will ever love me,” followed again by the critic,
who told me that the best way to help her would be to ignore all that noise
and to increase her medications.
Clearly , in their desire to protect her injured parts, these managers were
unintentionally doing her harm. So I kept asking them what they thought
would happen if they stepped back. Joan answered: “People will hate me”
and “I will be all alone and out in the street.” This was followed by a
memory: Her mother had told her that if she disobeyed, she would be put up
for adoption and never see her sisters or her dog again. When I asked her
how she felt about that scared girl inside, she cried and said that she felt bad
for her . Now her Self was back, and I was confident that we had calmed the
system down, but this session turned out to be too much too soon.
PUTTING OUT THE FLAMESThe following week Joan missed her appointment. W e had triggered her
exiles, and her firefighters went on a rampage. As she told me later , the
evening after we talked about her terror of being put into foster care, she
felt as if she were going to blast out of herself. She went to a bar and picked
up a guy . Coming home late, drunk, and disheveled, she refused to talk to
her husband and fell asleep in the den. The next morning she acted as if
nothing had happened.
Firefighters will do anything to make emotional pain go away . Aside
from sharing the task of keeping the exiles locked up, they are the opposite
of managers: Managers are all about staying in control, while firefighters
will destroy the house in order to extinguish the fire. The struggle between
uptight managers and out-of-control firefighters will continue until the
exiles, which carry the burden of the trauma, are allowed to come home and
be cared for .
Anyone who deals with survivors will encounter those firefighters. I’ve
met firefighters who shop, drink, play computer games addictively , have
impulsive af fairs, or exercise compulsively . A sordid encounter can blunt
the abused child’ s horror and shame, if only for a couple of hours.
It is critical to remember that, at their core, firefighters are also
desperately trying to protect the system. Unlike managers, who are usually
superficially cooperative during therapy , firefighters don’ t hold back: They
hurl insults and storm out of the room. Firefighters are frantic, and if you
ask them what would happen if they stopped doing their job, you discover
that they believe the exiled feelings would crash the entire self-system.
They are also oblivious to the idea that there are better ways to guarantee
physical and emotional safety , and even if behaviors like bingeing or
cutting stop, firefighters often find other methods of self-harm. These
cycles will come to an end only when the Self is able to take char ge and the
system feels safe.
THE BURDEN OF T OXICITY
Exiles are the toxic waste dump of the system. Because they hold the
memories, sensations, beliefs, and emotions associated with trauma, it is
hazardous to release them. They contain the “Oh, my God, I’m done for”experience—the essence of inescapable shock—and with it, terror , collapse,
and accommodation. Exiles may reveal themselves in the form of crushing
physical sensations or extreme numbing, and they of fend both the
reasonableness of the managers and the bravado of the firefighters.
Like most incest survivors, Joan hated her exiles, particularly the little
girl who had responded to her abuser ’ s sexual demands and the terrified
child who whimpered alone in her bed. When exiles overwhelm managers,
they take us over—we are nothing but that rejected, weak, unloved, and
abandoned child. The Self becomes “blended” with the exiles, and every
possible alternative for our life is eclipsed. Then, as Schwartz points out,
“W e see ourselves, and the world, through their eyes and believe it is ‘the’
world. In this state it won’ t occur to us that we have been hijacked.”17
Keeping the exiles locked up, however , stamps out not only memories
and emotions but also the parts that hold them—the parts that were hurt the
most by the trauma. In Schwartz’ s words: “Usually those are your most
sensitive, creative, intimacy-loving, lively , playful and innocent parts. By
exiling them when they get hurt, they suf fer a double whammy—the insult
of your rejection is added to their original injury .”18 As  Joan discovered,
keeping the exiles hidden and despised was condemning her to a life
without intimacy or genuine joy .
UNLOCKING THE P AST
Several months into Joan’ s treatment we again accessed the exiled girl who
carried the humiliation, confusion, and shame of Joan’ s molestation. By
then she had come to trust me enough and had developed enough sense of
Self to be able to tolerate observing herself as a child, with all her long-
buried feelings of terror , excitement, surrender , and complicity . She did not
say very much during this process, and my main job was to keep her in a
state of calm self-observation. She often had the impulse to pull away in
disgust and horror , leaving this unacceptable child alone in her misery . At
these points I asked her protectors to step back so that she could keep
listening to what her little girl wanted her to know .
Finally , with my encouragement, she was able to rush into the scene
and take the girl away with her to a safe place. She firmly told her abuserthat she would never let him get close to her again. Instead of denying the
child, she played an active role in liberating her . As in EMDR the resolution
of the trauma was the result of her ability to access her imagination and
rework the scenes in which she had become frozen so long ago. Helpless
passivity was replaced by determined Self-led action.
Once Joan started to own her impulses and behaviors, she recognized
the emptiness of her relationship with her husband, Brian, and began to
insist on change. I invited her to ask Brian to meet with us, and she was
present for eight sessions before he began to see me individually .
Schwartz observes that IFS can help family members “mentor” each
other as they learn to observe how one person’ s parts interact with
another ’ s. I witnessed this firsthand with Joan and Brian. Brian was initially
quite proud of having put up with Joan’ s behavior for so long; feeling that
she really needed him had kept him from even considering divorce. But
now that she wanted more intimacy , he felt pressured and inadequate—
revealing a panicked part that blanked out and put up a wall against feeling.
Gradually Brian began to talk about growing up in an alcoholic family
where behaviors like Joan’ s were common and lar gely ignored, punctuated
by his father ’ s stays in detox centers and his mother ’ s long hospitalizations
for depression and suicide attempts. When I asked his panicked part what
would happen if it allowed Brian to feel anything, he revealed his fear of
being overwhelmed by pain—the pain of his childhood added to the pain of
his relationship with Joan.
Over the next few weeks other parts emer ged. First came a protector
that was frightened of women and determined never to let Brian become
vulnerable to their manipulations. Then we discovered a strong caretaker
part that had looked after his mother and his younger siblings. This part
gave Brian a feeling of self-worth and purpose and a way of dealing with
his own terror . Finally , Brian was ready to meet his exile, the scared,
essentially motherless child who’d had no one to care for him.
This is a very short version of a long exploration, which involved many
diversions, as when Joan’ s critic reemer ged from time to time. But from the
beginning IFS helped Joan and Brian hear themselves and each other from
the perspective of an objective, curious, and compassionate Self. They were
no longer locked in the past, and a whole range of new possibilities opened
up for them.THE POWER OF SELF-COMP ASSION: IFS IN THE
TREA TMENT OF RHEUMA T OID AR THRITIS
Nancy Shadick is a rheumatologist at Boston’ s Brigham and W omen’ s
Hospital who combines medical research on rheumatoid arthritis (RA) with
a strong interest in her patients’ personal experience of their illness. When
she discovered IFS at a workshop with Richard Schwartz, she decided to
incorporate the therapy into a study of psychosocial intervention with RA
patients.
RA is an autoimmune disease that causes inflammatory disorders
throughout the body , causing chronic pain and disability . Medication can
delay its progress and relieve some of the pain, but there is no cure, and
living with RA can lead to depression, anxiety , isolation, and overall
impaired quality of life. I followed this study with particular interest
because of the link I’d observed between trauma and autoimmune disease.
W orking with senior IFS therapist Nancy Sowell, Dr . Shadick created a
nine-month randomized study in which one group of RA patients would
receive both group and individual instruction in IFS while a control group
received regular mailings and phone calls regarding disease symptoms and
management. Both groups continued with their regular medications, and
they were assessed periodically by rheumatologists who were not informed
which group they belonged to.
The goal of the IFS group was to teach patients how to accept and
understand their inevitable fear , hopelessness, and anger and to treat those
feelings as members of their own “internal family .” They would learn the
inner dialogue skills that would enable them to recognize their pain,
identify the accompanying thoughts and emotions, and then approach these
internal states with interest and compassion.
A basic problem emer ged early . Like so many trauma survivors, the RA
patients were alexithymic. As Nancy Sowell later told me, they never
complained about their pain or disability unless they were totally
overwhelmed. Asked how they were feeling, they almost always replied,
“I’m fine.” Their stoic parts clearly helped them cope, but these managers
also kept them in a state of denial. Some shut out their bodily sensations
and emotions to the extent that they could not collaborate ef fectively with
their doctors.T o get things moving, the leaders introduced the IFS parts dramatically ,
rearranging furniture and props to represent managers, exiles, and
firefighters. Over the course of several weeks, group members began to talk
about the managers who told them to “grin and bear it” because no one
wanted to hear about their pain anyway . Then, as they asked the stoic parts
to step back, they started to acknowledge the angry part that wanted to yell
and wreak havoc, the part that wanted stay in bed all the time, and the exile
who felt worthless because she wasn’ t allowed to talk. It emer ged that, as
children, nearly all of them were supposed to be seen and not heard—safety
meant keeping their needs under wraps.
Individual IFS therapy helped patients apply the language of parts to
daily issues. For example, one woman felt trapped by conflicts at her job,
where a manager part insisted the only way out was to overwork until her
RA flared up. W ith the therapist’ s help she realized that she could care for
her needs without making herself sick.
The two groups, IFS and controls, were evaluated three times during
the nine-month study period and then again one year later . At the end of
nine months, the IFS group showed measurable improvements in self-
assessed joint pain, physical function, self-compassion, and overall pain
relative to the education group. They also showed significant improvements
in depression and self-ef ficacy . The IFS group’ s gains in pain perception
and depressive symptoms were sustained one year later , although objective
medical tests could no longer detect measurable improvements in pain or
function. In other words, what had changed most was the patients’ ability to
live with their disease. In their conclusions, Shadick and Sowell
emphasized IFS’ s focus on self-compassion as a key factor .
This was not the first study to show that psychological interventions
can help RA patients. Cognitive behavioral therapies and mindfulness-
based practices have also been shown to have a positive impact on pain,
joint inflammation, physical disability , and depression.19 However , none of
these studies has asked a crucial question: Are increased psychological
safety and comfort reflected in a better -functioning immune system?
LIBERA TING THE EXILED CHILDPeter ran an oncology service at a prestigious academic medical center that
was consistently rated as one of the best in the country . As he sat in my
of fice, in perfect physical shape because of his regular squash practice, his
confidence had crossed the line into arrogance. This man certainly did not
seem to suf fer from PTSD. He told me he just wanted to know how he
could help his wife to be less “touchy .” She had threatened to leave him
unless he did something about what she termed his callous behavior . Peter
assured me that her perception was warped, because he obviously had no
problem being empathic with sick people.
He loved talking about his work, proud of the fact that residents and
fellows competed fiercely to be on his service and also of scuttlebutt he’d
heard about his staf f being terrified of him. He described himself as brutally
honest, a real scientist, someone who just looked at the facts and—with a
meaningful glance in my direction—did not suf fer fools gladly . He had high
standards, but no higher than he had for himself, and he assured me that he
didn’ t need anybody’ s love, just their respect.
Peter also told me that his psychiatry rotation in med school had
convinced him that psychiatrists still practiced witchcraft, and his one stint
in couples’ therapy had further confirmed that opinion. He expressed
contempt for people who blamed their parents or society for their problems.
Even though he had had his own share of misery as a child, he was
determined never to think of himself as a victim.
While Peter ’ s toughness and his love for precision appealed to me, I
could not help but wonder if we would discover something I’d seen all too
often: that internal managers who are obsessed with power are usually
created as a bulwark against feeling helpless.
When I asked him about his family , Peter told me that his father ran a
manufacturing business. He was a Holocaust survivor who could be brutal
and exacting, but he also had a tender and sentimental side that had kept
Peter connected with him and that had inspired Peter to become a physician.
As he told me about his mother , he realized for the first time that she had
substituted rigorous housekeeping for genuine care, but Peter denied that
this bothered him. He went to school and got straight As. He had vowed to
build a life free of rejection and humiliation, but, ironically , he lived with
death and rejection every day—death on the oncology ward and the
constant struggle to get his research funded and published.Peter ’ s wife joined us for the next meeting. She described how he
criticized her incessantly—her taste in clothes, her child-rearing practices,
her reading habits, her intelligence, her friends. He was rarely at home and
never emotionally available. Because he had so many important obligations,
and because he was so explosive, his family always tiptoed around him. She
was determined to leave him and start a new life unless he made some
radical changes. At that point, for the first time, I saw Peter become
obviously distressed. He assured me and his wife that he wanted to work
things out.
At our next session I asked him to let his body relax, close his eyes,
focus his attention inside, and ask that critical part—the one his wife had
identified — what it was afraid would happen if he stopped his ruthless
judging. After about thirty seconds he said he felt stupid talking to himself.
He didn’ t want to try some new age gimmick—he’d come to me looking for
“empirically verified therapy .” I assured him that, like him, I was at the
forefront of empirically based therapies and that this was one of them. He
was silent for perhaps a minute before he whispered: “I would get hurt.” I
ur ged him to ask the critic what that meant. Still with his eyes closed, Peter
replied: “If you criticize others, they don’ t dare to hurt you.” Then: “If you
are perfect, nobody can criticize you.” I asked him to thank his critic for
protecting him against hurt and humiliation, and as he became silent again,
I could see his shoulders relax and his breathing become slower and deeper .
He next told me that he was aware that his pomposity was af fecting his
relationships with his colleagues and students; he felt lonely and despised
during staf f meetings and uncomfortable at hospital parties. When I asked
him if he wanted to change the way that angry part threatened people, he
replied that he did. I then asked him where it was located in his body , and
he found it in the middle of his chest. Keeping his focus inside, I asked him
how he felt toward it. He said it made him scared.
Next I asked him to stay focused on it and see how he felt toward it
now . He said he was curious to know more about it. I asked him how old it
was. He said about seven. I asked him to have his critic show him what he
protected. After a lengthy silence, still with his eyes closed, he told me that
he was witnessing a scene from his childhood. His father was beating a
little boy , him, and he was standing to one side thinking how stupid that kid
was to provoke his dad. When I asked him how he felt about the boy whowas getting hurt, he told me that he despised him. He was a weakling and a
whiner; after showing even the least bit of defiance to his dad’ s high-
handed ways, he inevitably capitulated and whimpered that he would be a
good little boy . He had no guts, no fire in his belly . I asked the critic if he
would be willing to step aside so we could see what was going on with that
boy . In response the critic appeared in full force and called him names like
“wimp” and “sissy .” I asked Peter again if the critic would be willing to step
aside and give the boy a chance to speak. He shut down completely and left
the session saying that he was unlikely ever to set foot in my of fice again.
But the following week he was back: As she had threatened, his wife
had gone to a lawyer and filed for divorce. He was devastated and no longer
looked anything like the perfectly put-together doctor whom I’d come to
know and, in many ways, dread. Faced with the loss of his family , he
became unhinged and felt comforted by the idea that if things got too bad
he could take his life in his own hands.
W e went inside again and identified the part that was terrified of
abandonment. Once he was in his mindful Self-state, I ur ged him to ask that
terrified boy to show him the burdens he was carrying. Again, his first
reaction was disgust at the boy’ s weakness, but after I asked him to get that
part to step back, he saw an image of himself as a young boy in his parents’
house, alone in his room, screaming in terror . Peter watched this scene for
several minutes, weeping silently through much of it. I asked him if the boy
had told him everything he wanted him to know . No, there were other
scenes, like running to embrace his father at the door and getting slapped
for having disobeyed his mother .
From time to time he would interrupt the process by explaining why his
parents couldn’ t have done any better than they had, their being Holocaust
survivors and all that implied. Again I suggested he find the protective parts
that were interrupting the witnessing of the boy’ s pain and request that they
move temporarily to another room. And each time he was able to return to
his grief.
I asked Peter to tell the boy that he now understood how bad the
experience had been. He sat in a long, sad silence. Then I asked him to
show the boy that he cared about him. After some coaxing he put his arms
around the boy . I was surprised that this seemingly harsh and callous man
knew exactly how to take care of him.Then, after some time, I ur ged Peter to go back into the scene and take
the boy away with him. Peter imagined himself confronting his dad as a
grown man, telling him: “If you ever mess with that boy again, I’ll come
and kill you.” He then, in his imagination, took the child to a beautiful
campground he knew , where the boy could play and frolic with ponies
while he watched over him.
Our work was not done. After his wife rescinded her threat of divorce,
some of his old habits returned, and we had to revisit that isolated boy from
time to time to make sure that Peter ’ s wounded parts were taken care of,
especially when he felt hurt by something that happened at home or on the
job. This is the stage IFS calls “unburdening,” and it corresponds to nursing
those exiled parts back to health. W ith each new unburdening Peter ’ s once-
scathing inner critic relaxed, as little by little it became more like a mentor
than a judge, and he began to repair his relationships with his family and
colleagues. He also stopped suf fering from tension headaches.
One day he told me that he’d spent his adulthood trying to let go of his
past, and he remarked how ironic it was that he had to get closer to it in
order to let it go.IC H A P T E R  1 8
F I L L I N G  I N  T H E  H O L E S :  C R E A T I N G
S T R U C T U R E S
The greatest discovery of my generation is that human beings can
alter their lives by altering their attitudes of mind.
—W illiam James
It is not that something dif ferent is seen, but that one sees
dif ferently . It is as though the spatial act of seeing were changed by
a new dimension.
—Carl Jung
t is one thing to process memories of trauma, but it is an entirely dif ferent
matter to confront the inner void—the holes in the soul that result from
not having been wanted, not having been seen, and not having been allowed
to speak the truth. If your parents’ faces never lit up when they looked at
you, it’ s hard to know what it feels like to be loved and cherished. If you
come from an incomprehensible world filled with secrecy and fear , it’ s
almost impossible to find the words to express what you have endured. If
you grew up unwanted and ignored, it is a major challenge to develop a
visceral sense of agency and self-worth.
The research that Judy Herman, Chris Perry , and I had done (see
chapter 9) showed that people who felt unwanted as children, and thosewho did not remember feeling safe with anyone while growing up, did not
fully benefit from conventional psychotherapy , presumably because they
could not activate old traces of feeling cared for .
I could see this even in some of my most committed and articulate
patients. Despite their hard work in therapy and their share of personal and
professional accomplishments,  they could not erase the devastating imprints
of a mother who was too depressed to notice them or a father who treated
them like he wished they’d never been born. It was clear that their lives
would change fundamentally only if they could reconstruct those implicit
maps. But how?  How can we help people become viscerally acquainted
with feelings that were lacking early in their lives?
I glimpsed a possible answer when I attended the founding conference
of the United States Association for Body Psychotherapy in June 1994 at a
small college in Beverley on the rocky Massachusetts coast. Ironically , I
had been asked to represent mainstream psychiatry at the meeting and to
speak on using brain scans to visualize mental states. But as soon as I
walked into the lobby where attendees had gathered for morning cof fee, I
realized this was a dif ferent crowd from my usual psychopharmacology or
psychotherapy gatherings. The way they talked to one another , their
postures and gestures, radiated vitality and engagement—the sort of
physical reciprocity that is the essence of attunement.
I soon struck up a conversation with Albert Pesso, a stocky former
dancer with the Martha Graham Dance Company who was then in his early
seventies. Underneath his bushy eyebrows he exuded kindness and
confidence. He told me that he had found a way of fundamentally changing
people’ s relationship to their core, somatic selves. His enthusiasm was
infectious, but I was skeptical and asked him if he was certain he could
change the settings of the amygdala. Unfazed by the fact that nobody had
ever tested his method scientifically , he confidently assured me that he
could.
Pesso was about to conduct a workshop in “PBSP psychomotor
therapy ,”1 and he invited me to attend. It was unlike any group work I had
ever seen. He took a low chair opposite a woman named Nancy , whom he
called a “protagonist,” with the other participants seated on pillows around
them. He then invited Nancy to talk about what was troubling her ,occasionally using her pauses to “witness” what he was observing—as in
“A witness can see how crestfallen you are when you talk about your father
deserting the family .” I was impressed by how carefully he tracked subtle
shifts in body posture, facial expression, tone of voice, and eye gaze, the
nonverbal expressions of emotion. (This is called “microtracking” in
psychomotor therapy).
Each time Pesso made a “witness statement,” Nancy’ s face and body
relaxed a bit, as if she felt comforted by being seen and validated. His quiet
comments seemed to bolster her courage to continue and go deeper . When
Nancy started to cry , he observed that nobody should have to bear so much
pain all by herself, and he asked if she would like to choose someone to sit
next to her .  (He called this a “contact person.”) Nancy nodded and, after
carefully scanning the room, pointed to a kind-looking middle-aged woman.
Pesso asked Nancy where she would like her contact person to sit. “Right
here,” Nancy said decisively , indicating a pillow immediately to her right.
I was fascinated. People process spatial relations with the right
hemisphere of the brain, and our neuroimaging research had shown that the
imprint of trauma is principally on the right hemisphere as well (see chapter
3). Caring, disapproval, and indif ference all are primarily conveyed by
facial expression, tone of voice, and physical movements. According to
recent research, up to 90 percent of human communication occurs in the
nonverbal, right-hemisphere realm,2 and this was where Pesso’ s work
seemed primarily to be directed. As the workshop went on, I was also
struck by how the contact person’ s presence seemed to help Nancy tolerate
the painful experiences she was dredging up.3
But what was most unusual was how Pesso created tableaus—or as he
called them, “structures”—of the protagonists’ past. As the narratives
unfolded, group participants were asked to play the roles of significant
people in the protagonists’ lives, such as parents and other family members,
so that their inner world began to take form in three-dimensional space.
Group members were also enlisted to play the ideal, wished-for parents who
would provide the support, love, and protection that had been lacking at
critical moments. Protagonists became the directors of their own plays,
creating around them the past they never had, and they clearly experienced
profound physical and mental relief after these imaginary scenarios. Couldthis technique instill imprints of safety and comfort alongside those of terror
and abandonment, decades after the original shaping of mind and brain?
Intrigued with the promise of Pesso’ s work, I eagerly accepted his
invitation to visit his hilltop farmhouse in southern New Hampshire. After
lunch beneath an ancient oak tree, Al asked me to join him in his red
clapboard barn, now a studio, to do a structure. I’d spent several years in
psychoanalysis, so I did not expect any major revelations. I was a settled
professional man in my forties with my own family , and I thought of my
parents as two elderly people who were trying to create a decent old age for
themselves. I certainly did not think they still had a major influence on me.
Since there were no other people available for role-play , Al began by
asking me to select an object or a piece of furniture to represent my father . I
chose a gigantic black leather couch and asked Al to put it upright about
eight feet in front of me, slightly to the left. Then he asked if I’d like to
bring my mother into the room as well, and I chose a heavy lamp,
approximately the same height as the upright couch. As the session
continued, the space became populated with the important people in my
life: my best friend, a tiny Kleenex box to my right; my wife, a small pillow
next to him; my two children, two more tiny pillows.
After a while I surveyed the projection of my internal landscape: two
hulking, dark, and threatening objects representing my parents and an array
of minuscule objects representing my wife, children, and friends. I was
astounded; I had re-created my inner image of my stern Calvinistic parents
from the time I was a little boy . My chest felt tight, and I’m sure that my
voice sounded even tighter . I could not deny what my spatial brain was
revealing: The structure had allowed me to visualize my implicit map of the
world.
When I told Al what I had just uncovered, he nodded and asked if I
would allow him to change my perspective. I felt my skepticism return, but
I liked Al and was curious about his method, so I hesitantly agreed. He then
interposed his body directly between me and the couch and lamp, making
them disappear from my line of sight. Instantaneously I felt a deep release
in my body—the constriction in my chest eased and my breathing became
relaxed. That was the moment I decided to become Pesso’ s student.4RESTRUCTURING INNER MAPS
Projecting your inner world into the three-dimensional space of a structure
enables you to see what’ s happening in the theater of your mind and gives
you a much clearer perspective on your reactions to people and events in
the past. As you position placeholders for the important people in your life,
you may be surprised by the unexpected memories, thoughts, and emotions
that come up. Y ou then can experiment with moving the pieces around on
the external chessboard that you’ve created and see what ef fect it has on
you.
Although the structures involve dialogue, psychomotor therapy does
not explain or interpret the past. Instead, it allows you to feel what you felt
back then, to visualize what you saw , and to say what you could not say
when it actually happened. It’ s as if you could go back into the movie of
your life and rewrite the crucial scenes.  Y ou can direct the role-players to
do things they failed to do in the past, such as keeping your father from
beating up your mom. These tableaus can stimulate powerful emotions. For
example, as you place your “real mother” in the corner , cowering in terror ,
you may feel a deep longing  to protect her and realize how powerless you
felt as a child. But if you then create an ideal mother , who stands up to your
father and who knows how to avoid getting trapped in abusive
relationships , you may experience a visceral sense of relief and an
unburdening of that old guilt and helplessness. Or you might confront the
brother who brutalized you as a child and then create an ideal brother who
protects you and becomes your role model.
The job of the director / therapist and other group members is to provide
protagonists with the support they need to delve into whatever they have
been too afraid to explore on their own. The safety of the group allows you
to notice things that you have hidden from yourself—usually the things you
are most ashamed of. When you no longer have to hide, the structure allows
you to place the shame where it belongs—on the figures right in front of
you who represent those who hurt you and made you feel helpless as a
child.
Feeling safe means you can say things to your father (or , rather , the
placeholder who represents him) that you wish you could have said as a
five-year -old. Y ou can tell the placeholder for your depressed andfrightened mother how terrible you felt about not being able to take care of
her . Y ou can experiment with distance and proximity and explore what
happens as you move placeholders around. As an active participant, you can
lose yourself in a scene in a way you cannot when you simply tell a story .
And as you take char ge of representing the reality of your experience, the
witness keeps you company , reflecting the changes in your posture, facial
expression, and tone of voice.
In my experience, physically reexperiencing the past in the present and
then reworking it in a safe and supportive “container” can be powerful
enough to create new , supplemental memories: simulated experiences of
growing up in an attuned, af fectionate setting where you are protected from
harm. Structures do not erase bad memories, or even neutralize them the
way EMDR does. Instead, a structure of fers fresh options—an alternative
memory in which your basic human needs are met and your longings for
love and protection are fulfilled.
REVISING THE P AST
Let me give an example from a workshop I led not long ago at the Esalen
Institute in Big Sur , California.
Maria was a slender , athletic Filipina in her midforties who had been
pleasant and accommodating during our first two days, which had been
devoted to exploring the long-term impact of trauma  and teaching self-
regulation techniques. But now , seated on her pillow about six feet away
from me, she looked scared and collapsed. I wondered to myself if she had
volunteered as a protagonist mainly to please the girlfriend who had
accompanied her to the workshop.
I began by encouraging her to notice what was going on inside her and
to share whatever came to mind. After a long silence she said: “I can’ t
really feel anything in my body , and my mind is blank.” Mirroring her inner
tension, I replied: “A witness can see how worried you are that your mind is
blank and you don’ t feel anything after volunteering to do a structure. Is
that right?” “Y es!” she answered, sounding slightly relieved.
The “witness figure” enters the structure at the very beginning and
takes the role of an accepting, nonjudgmental observer who joins theprotagonist by reflecting his or her emotional state and noting the context in
which that state has emer ged (as when I mentioned Maria’ s “volunteering to
do a structure”). Being validated by feeling heard and seen is a precondition
for feeling safe, which is critical when we explore the dangerous territory of
trauma and abandonment. A neuroimaging study has shown that when
people hear a statement that mirrors their inner state, the right amygdala
momentarily lights up, as if to underline the accuracy of the reflection.
I encouraged Maria to keep focusing on her breath, one of the exercises
we had been practicing together , and to notice what she was feeling in her
body . After another long silence she hesitantly began to speak: “There is
always a sense of fear in everything I do. It doesn’ t look like I am afraid,
but I am always pushing myself. It is really dif ficult for me to be up here.” I
reflected, “A witness can see how uncomfortable you feel pushing yourself
to be here,” and she nodded, slightly straightening her spine, signaling that
she felt understood. She continued: “I grew up thinking that my family was
normal. But I always was terrified of my dad. I never felt cared for by him.
He never hit me as hard as he did my siblings, but I have a pervasive sense
of fear .” I noted that a witness could see how afraid she looked as she spoke
of her father , and then I invited her to select a group member to represent
him.
Maria scanned the room and chose Scott, a gentle video producer who
had been a lively and supportive member of the group. I gave Scott his
script: “I enroll as your real father , who terrified you when you were a little
girl,” which he repeated. (Note that this work is not about improvisation but
about accurately enacting the dialogue and directions provided by the
witness and protagonist.) I then asked Maria where she would like her real
father to be positioned, and she instructed Scott to stand about twelve feet
away , slightly to her right and facing away from her . W e were beginning to
create the tableau, and every time I conduct a structure I’m impressed by
how precise the outward projections of the right hemisphere are.
Protagonists always know exactly where the various characters in their
structures should be located.
It also surprises me, again and again, how the placeholders representing
the significant people in the protagonist’ s past almost immediately assume a
virtual reality: The people who enroll seem to become the people he or she
had to deal with back then—not only to the protagonist but often to theother participants as well. I encouraged Maria to take a good, long look at
her real father , and as she gazed at him standing there, we could witness
how her emotions shifted between terror and a deep sense of compassion
for him. She tearfully reflected on how dif ficult his life had been—how , as
a child during W orld W ar II, he had seen people beheaded; how he had been
forced to eat rotten fish infested with maggots. Structures promote one of
the essential conditions for deep therapeutic change: a trancelike state in
which multiple realities can live side by side—past and present, knowing
that you’re an adult while feeling the way you did as a child, expressing
your rage or terror to someone who feels like your abuser while being fully
aware that you are talking to Scott, who is nothing like your real father , and
experiencing simultaneously the complex emotions of loyalty , tenderness,
rage, and longing that kids feel with their parents.
As Maria began to speak about their relationship when she was a little
girl, I continued to mirror her expressions. Her father had brutalized her
mother , she said. He was relentlessly critical of her diet, her body , her
housekeeping, and she was always afraid for her mother when he berated
her . Maria described her mother as loving and warm; she could not have
survived without her . She would always be there to comfort Maria after her
father lashed out at her , but she didn’ t do anything to protect her children
from their father ’ s rage. “I think my mom had a lot of fear herself. I have a
sense that she didn’ t protect us because she felt trapped.”
At this point I suggested that it was time to call Maria’ s real mother
into the room. Maria scanned the group and smiled brightly as she asked
Kristin, a blonde, Scandinavian-looking artist, to play the part of her real
mother . Kristin accepted in the formal words of the structure: “I enroll as
your real mother , who was warm and loving and without whom you would
not have survived but who failed to protect you from your abusive father .”
Maria had her sit on a pillow to her right, much closer than her real father .
I encouraged Maria to look at Kristin and then I asked, “So what
happens when you look at her?” Maria angrily said, “Nothing.” “A witness
would see how you stif fen as you look at your real mom and angrily say
that you feel nothing,” I noted. After a long silence I asked again, “So what
happens now?” Maria looked slightly more collapsed and repeated,
“Nothing.” I asked her , “Is there something you want to say to your mom?”
Finally Maria said, “I know you did the best you could,” and then, momentslater: “I wanted you to protect me.” When she began to cry softly , I asked
her , “What is happening inside?” “Holding my chest, my heart feels like it
is pounding really hard,” Maria said. “My sadness goes out to my mom;
how incapable she was of standing up to my father and protecting us. She
just shuts down, pretending everything’ s okay , and in her mind it probably
is, and that makes me mad today . I want to say to her: ‘Mom, when I see
you react to dad when he is being mean . . . when I see your face, you look
disgusted and I don’ t know why you don’ t say , “Fuck of f.” Y ou don’ t know
how to fight—you are such a pushover—there is a part of you that is not
good and not alive. I don’ t even know what I want you to say . I just want
you to be dif ferent—nothing you do is right, like you accept everything
when it is totally not okay .’” I noted, “A witness would see how fierce you
are as you want your mother to stand up to your dad.” Maria then talked
about how she wanted her mother to run of f with the kids and take them
away from her terrifying father .
I then suggested enrolling another group member to represent her ideal
mother . Maria scanned the room again and chose Ellen, a therapist and
martial artist. Maria placed her on a pillow to her right between her real
mother and herself and asked Ellen to put her arm around her . “What do
you want your ideal mother to say to your dad?” I asked. “I want her to say ,
‘If you are going to talk like that, I am going to leave you and take the
kids,’” she answered. “‘W e are not going to sit here and listen to this shit.’”
Ellen repeated Maria’ s words. Then I asked: “What happens now?” Maria
responded: “I like it. I have a little pressure in my head. My breath is free. I
have a subtle ener getic dance in my body now . Sweet.” “A witness can see
how delighted you are when you hear your mother saying that she is not
taking this shit from your dad anymore and that she will take you away
from him,” I told her . Maria began to sob and said, “I would have been able
to be a safe, happy little girl.” Out of the corner of my eye I could see
several group members weeping silently—the possibility of growing up
safe and happy clearly resonated with their own longings.
After a while I suggested that it was time to summon Maria’ s ideal
father . I could clearly see the delight in Maria’ s eyes as she scanned the
group, imagining her ideal father . She finally chose Danny . I gave him his
script, and he gently told her: “I enroll as your ideal father , who would have
loved you and cared for you and who would not have terrified you.” Mariainstructed him to take a seat near her on her left and beamed. “My healthy
mom and dad!” she exclaimed. I responded: “Allow yourself to feel that joy
as you look at an ideal dad who would have cared for you.” Maria cried,
“It’ s beautiful,” and threw her arms around Danny , smiling at him through
her tears. “I am remembering a really tender moment with my dad, and that
is what this feels like. I would love to have my mom next to me too.” Both
ideal parents tenderly responded and cradled her . I left them there for a
while so that they could fully internalize the experience.
W e finished with Danny saying: “If I had been your ideal dad back
then, I would have loved you just like this and not have inflicted my
cruelty ,” while Ellen added, “If I had been your ideal mom, I would have
stood up for you and me and protected you and not let any harm come to
you.” All the characters then made final statements, deenrolling from the
roles they had played, and formally resumed being themselves.
RESCRIPTING YOUR LIFE
Nobody grows up under ideal circumstances—as if we even know what
ideal circumstances are. As my late friend David Servan-Schreiber once
said: every life is dif ficult in its own way . But we do know that, in order to
become self-confident and capable adults, it helps enormously to have
grown up with steady and predictable parents; parents who delighted in
you, in your discoveries and explorations; parents who helped you or ganize
your comings and goings; and who served as role models for self-care and
getting along with other people.
Defects in any of these areas are likely to manifest themselves later in
life. A child who has been ignored or chronically humiliated is likely to
lack self-respect. Children who have not been allowed to assert themselves
will probably have dif ficulty standing up for themselves as adults, and most
grown-ups who were brutalized as children carry a smoldering rage that
will take a great deal of ener gy to contain.
Our relationships will suf fer as well. The more early pain and
deprivation we have experienced, the more likely we are to interpret other
people’ s actions as being directed against us and the less understanding we
will be of their struggles, insecurities, and concerns. If we cannot appreciatethe complexity of their lives, we may see anything they do as a
confirmation that we are going to get hurt and disappointed.
In the chapters on the biology of trauma we saw how trauma and
abandonment disconnect people from their body as a source of pleasure and
comfort, or even as a part of themselves that needs care and nurturance.
When we cannot rely on our body to signal safety or warning and instead
feel chronically overwhelmed by physical stirrings, we lose the capacity to
feel at home in our own skin and, by extension, in the world. As long as
their map of the world is based on trauma, abuse, and neglect, people are
likely to seek shortcuts to oblivion. Anticipating rejection, ridicule, and
deprivation, they are reluctant to try out new options, certain that these will
lead to failure. This lack of experimentation traps people in a matrix of fear ,
isolation, and scarcity where it is impossible to welcome the very
experiences that might change their basic worldview .
This is one reason the highly structured experiences of psychomotor
therapy are so valuable. Participants can safely project their inner reality
into a space filled with real people, where they can explore the cacophony
and confusion of the past. This leads to concrete aha moments: “Y es, that is
what it was like. That is what I had to deal with. And that is what it would
have felt like back then if I had been cherished and cradled.” Acquiring a
sensory experience of feeling treasured and protected as a three-year -old in
the trancelike container of a structure allows people to rescript their inner
experience, as in “I can spontaneously interact with other people without
having to be afraid of being rejected or getting hurt.”
Structures harness the extraordinary power of the imagination to
transform the inner narratives that drive and confine our functioning in the
world. W ith the proper support the secrets that once were too dangerous to
be revealed can be disclosed not just to a therapist, a latter -day father
confessor , but, in our imagination, to the people who actually hurt and
betrayed us.
The three-dimensional nature of the structure transforms the hidden, the
forbidden, and the feared into visible, concrete reality . In this it is somewhat
similar to IFS, which we explored in the previous chapter . IFS calls forth
the split-of f parts that you created in order to survive and enables you to
identify and talk with them, so that your undamaged Self can emer ge. Incontrast, a structure creates a three-dimensional image of whom and what
you had to deal with and gives you a chance to create a dif ferent outcome.
Most people are hesitant to go into past pain and disappointment—it
only promises to bring back the intolerable. But as they are mirrored and
witnessed, a new reality begins to take shape. Accurate mirroring feels
completely dif ferent from being ignored, criticized, and put down. It gives
you permission to feel what you feel and know what you know — one of the
essential foundations of recovery .
T rauma causes people to remain stuck in interpreting the present in
light of an unchanging past. The scene you re-create in a structure may or
may not be precisely what happened, but it represents the structure of your
inner world: your internal map and the hidden rules that you have been
living by .
DARING T O TELL THE TRUTH
I recently led another group structure with a twenty-six-year -old man
named Mark, who at age thirteen had accidentally overheard his father
having phone sex with his aunt, his mother ’ s sister . Mark felt confused,
embarrassed, hurt, betrayed, and paralyzed by this knowledge, but when he
tried to talk with his father about it, he was met with rage and denial: he
was told that he had a filthy imagination and accused of trying to break up
the family . Mark never dared to tell his mom, but henceforth the family
secrets and hypocrisy contaminated every aspect of his home life and gave
him a pervasive sense that nobody could be trusted. After school, he spent
his isolated adolescence hanging around neighborhood basketball courts or
in his room watching TV . When he was twenty-one his mother died—of a
broken heart, Mark says—and his father married the aunt. Mark was not
invited to either the funeral or the wedding.
Secrets like these become inner toxins—realities that you are not
allowed to acknowledge to yourself or to others but that nevertheless
become the template of your life. I knew none of this history when Mark
joined the group, but he stood out by his emotional distance, and during
check-ins he acknowledged that he felt separated from everyone by a densefog. I was quite worried about what would be revealed once we started to
look behind his frozen, expressionless exterior .
When I invited Mark to talk about his family , he said a few words and
then seemed to shut down even more. So I encouraged him to ask for a
“contact figure” to support him. He chose a white-haired group member ,
Richard, and placed Richard on a pillow next to him, touching his shoulder .
Then, as he began to tell his story , Mark placed Joe, as his real father , ten
feet in front of him, and directed Carolyn, representing his mother , to
crouch in a corner with her face hidden. Mark next asked Amanda to play
his aunt, telling her to stand defiantly to one side, arms crossed over her
chest—representing all the calculating, ruthless, and devious women who
are after men.
Surveying the tableau he had created, Mark sat up straight, eyes wide
open; clearly the fog had lifted. I said: “A witness can see how startled you
are seeing what you had to deal with.” Mark nodded appreciatively and
remained silent and somber for some time. Then, looking at his “father ,” he
burst out: “Y ou asshole, you hypocrite, you ruined my life.” I invited Mark
to tell his “father” all the things that he had wanted to tell him but never
could. A long list of accusations followed. I directed the “father” to respond
physically as if he had been punched, so that Mark could see that that his
blows had landed. It did not surprise me when Mark spontaneously said that
he’d always worried that his rage would get out of control and that this fear
had kept him from standing up for himself in school, at work, and in other
relationships.
After Mark had confronted his “father ,” I asked if he would like
Richard to assume a new role: that of his ideal father . I instructed Richard to
look Mark directly in the eye and to say: “If I had been your ideal father
back then, I would have listened to you and not accused you of having a
filthy imagination.” When Richard repeated this, Mark started to tremble.
“Oh my God, life would have been so dif ferent if I could have trusted my
father and talked about what was going on. I could have had  a father .” I
then told Richard to say: “If I had been your ideal father back then, I would
have welcomed your anger and you would have had  a father you could have
trusted.” Mark visibly relaxed and said that would have made all the
dif ference in the world.Then Mark addressed the stand-in for his aunt. The group was visibly
stunned as he unleashed a torrent of abuse on her: “Y ou conniving whore,
you backstabber . Y ou betrayed your sister and ruined her life. Y ou ruined
our family .” After he was done, Mark started to sob. He then said he’d
always been deeply suspicious of any woman who showed an interest in
him. The remainder of the structure took another half hour , in which we
slowly set up conditions for him to create two new women: the ideal aunt,
who did not betray her sister but who helped support their isolated
immigrant family , and the ideal mother , who kept her husband’ s interest and
devotion and so did not die of heartbreak. Mark ended the structure quietly
surveying the scene he had created with a contented smile on his face.
For the remainder of the workshop Mark was an open and valuable
member of the group, and three months later he sent me an e-mail saying
that this experience had changed his life. He had recently moved in with his
first girlfriend, and although they’d had some heated discussions about their
new arrangement, he’d been able to take in her point of view without
clamming up defensively , going back to his fear or rage, or feeling that she
was trying to pull a fast one. He was amazed that he felt okay disagreeing
with her and that he was able to stand up for himself. He then asked for the
name of a therapist in his community to help with the huge changes he was
making in his life, and I fortunately had a colleague I could refer him to.
ANTIDOTES T O P AINFUL MEMORIES
Like the model mugging classes that I discussed in chapter 13, the
structures in psychomotor therapy hold out the possibility of forming virtual
memories that live side by side with the painful realities of the past and
provide sensory experiences of feeling seen, cradled, and supported that can
serve as antidotes to memories of hurt and betrayal. In order to change,
people need to become viscerally familiar with realities that directly
contradict the static feelings of the frozen or panicked self of trauma,
replacing them with sensations rooted in safety , mastery , delight, and
connection. As we saw in the chapter on EMDR, one of the functions of
dreaming is to create associations in which the frustrating events of the day
are interwoven with the rest of one’ s life . Unlike our dreams, psychomotorstructures are still subject to the laws of physics, but they too can reweave
the past.
Of course we can never undo what happened, but we can create new
emotional scenarios intense and real enough to defuse and counter some of
those old ones. The healing tableaus of structures of fer an experience that
many participants have never believed was possible for them: to be
welcomed into a world where people delight in them, protect them, meet
their needs, and make you feel at home.TC H A P T E R  1 9
R E W I R I N G  T H E  B R A I N :
N E U R O F E E D B A C K
Is it a fact—or have I dreamt it—that by means of electricity , the
world of matter has become a great nerve, vibrating thousands of
miles in a breathless point of time?
—Nathaniel Hawthorne
The faculty of voluntarily bringing back a wandering attention,
over and over again, is the very root of the judgment, character ,
and will.
—W illiam James
he summer after my first year of medical school, I worked as a part-
time research assistant in Ernest Hartmann’ s sleep laboratory at Boston
State Hospital. My job was to prepare and monitor the study participants
and to analyze their EEG—electroencephalogram, or brain wave—tracings.
Subjects would show up in the evening; I would paste an array of wires
onto their scalps and another set of electrodes around their eyes to register
the rapid eye movements that occur during dreaming. Then I would walk
them to their bedrooms, bid them good night, and start the polygraph, a
bulky machine with thirty-two pens that transmitted their brain activity onto
a continuous spool of paper .Even though our subjects were fast asleep, the neurons in their brains
kept up their frenzied internal communication, which was transmitted to the
polygraph throughout the night. I’d settle down to pore over the previous
night’ s EEGs, stopping from time to time to pick up baseball scores on my
radio, and use the intercom to wake subjects whenever the polygraph
showed  a REM sleep cycle. I would ask what they had dreamed about and
write down what they reported and then in the morning help them fill out a
questionnaire about sleep quality and send them on their way .
Those quiet nights at Hartmann’ s lab documented a great deal about
REM sleep and contributed to building the basic understanding of sleep
processes, which paved the way for the crucial discoveries that I discussed
in chapter 15. However , until recently , the long-standing hope that the EEG
would help us better understand how electrical brain activity contributes to
psychiatric problems remained lar gely unrealized.
MAPPING THE ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS OF THE BRAIN
Before the advent of the pharmacological revolution, it was widely
understood that brain activity depends on both chemical and electrical
signals. The subsequent dominance of pharmacology almost obliterated
interest in the electrophysiology of the brain for several decades.
The first recording of the brain’ s electrical activity was made in 1924
by the German psychiatrist Hans Ber ger . This new technology was initially
met with skepticism and ridicule by the medical establishment, but
electroencephalography gradually became an indispensable tool for
diagnosing seizure activity in patients with epilepsy . Ber ger discovered that
dif ferent brain-wave patterns reflected dif ferent mental activities. (For
example, trying to solve a math problem resulted in bursts at a moderately
fast frequency band known as beta.) He hoped that eventually science
would be able to correlate dif ferent psychiatric problems with specific EEG
irregularities. This expectation was fueled by the first reports on EEG
patterns in “behavior problem children” in 1938.1 Most of these hyperactive
and impulsive children had slower -than-normal waves in their frontal lobes.
This finding has been reproduced innumerable times since then, and in
2013 slow-wave prefrontal activity was certified by the Food and DrugAdministration as a biomarker for ADHD. Slow frontal lobe electrical
activity explains why these kids have poor executive functioning: Their
rational brains lack proper control over their emotional brains, which also
occurs when abuse and trauma have made the emotional centers hyperalert
to danger and or ganized for fight or flight.
Early in my career I also hoped that the EEG might help us to make
better diagnoses, and between 1980 and 1990 I sent many of my patients to
get EEGs to determine if their emotional instability was rooted in
neurological abnormalities. The reports usually came back with the phrase:
“nonspecific temporal lobe abnormalities.”2 This told me very little, and
because at that time the only way we could change these ambiguous
patterns was with drugs that had more side ef fects than benefits, I gave up
doing routine EEGs on my patients.
Then, in 2000, a study by my friend Alexander McFarlane and his
associates (researchers in Adelaide, Australia) rekindled my interest, as it
documented clear dif ferences in information processing between
traumatized subjects and a group of “normal” Australians. The researchers
used a standardized test called “the oddball paradigm” in which subjects are
asked to detect the item that doesn’ t fit in a series of otherwise related
images (like a trumpet in a group of tables and chairs). None of the images
was related to trauma.
Normal versus PTSD.  Patterns of attention. Milliseconds after the brain is presented with
input it starts or ganizing the meaning of the incoming information. Normally , all regions of the
brain collaborate in a synchronized pattern (left), while the brainwaves in PTSD are less well
coordinated; the brain has trouble filtering out irrelevant information, and has problems
attending to the stimulus at hand.
In the “normal” group key parts of the brain worked together to
produce a coherent pattern of filtering, focus, and analysis. (See left imagebelow .) In contrast, the brain waves of traumatized subjects were more
loosely coordinated and failed to come together into a coherent pattern.
Specifically , they did not generate the brain-wave pattern that helps people
pay attention on the task at hand by filtering out irrelevant information (the
upward curve, labeled N200). In addition, the core information-processing
configuration of the brain (the downward peak, P300) was poorly defined;
the depth of the wave determines how well we are able to take in and
analyze new data. This was important new information about how
traumatized people process nontraumatic information that has profound
implications for understanding day-to-day information processing. These
brain-wave patterns could explain why so many traumatized people have
trouble learning from experience and fully engaging in their daily lives.
Their brains are not or ganized to pay careful attention to what is going on in
the present moment.
Sandy McFarlane’ s study reminded me of what Pierre Janet had said
back in 1889: “T raumatic stress is an illness of not being able to be fully
alive in the present.” Y ears later , when I saw the movie The Hurt Locker ,
which dealt with the experiences of soldiers in Iraq, I immediately recalled
Sandy’ s study: As long as they were coping with extreme stress, these men
performed with pinpoint focus; but back in civilian life they were
overwhelmed having to make simple choices in a supermarket. W e are now
seeing alarming statistics about the number of returning combat veterans
who enroll in college on the GI Bill but do not complete their degrees.
(Some estimates are over 80 percent.) Their well-documented problems
with focusing and attention are surely contributing to these poor results.
McFarlane’ s study clarified a possible mechanism for the lack of focus
and attention in PTSD, but it also presented a whole new challenge: W as
there any way to change these dysfunctional brain-wave patterns? It was
seven years before I learned that there might be ways to do that.
In 2007 I met Sebern Fisher at a conference on attachment-disordered
children. Sebern was the former clinical director of a residential treatment
center for severely disturbed adolescents, and she told me that she’d been
using neurofeedback in her private practice for about ten years. She showed
me before-and-after drawings made by a ten-year -old. This boy had hadsuch severe temper tantrums, learning disabilities, and overall dif ficulties
with self-or ganization that he could not be handled in school.3
His first family portrait (on the left opposite), drawn before treatment
started, was at the developmental level of a three-year -old.  Less than five
weeks later , after twenty sessions of neurofeedback, his tantrums had
decreased and his drawing showed a marked improvement in complexity .
T en weeks and another twenty sessions later , his drawing took another leap
in complexity and his behavior normalized.
I had never come across a treatment that could produce such a dramatic
change in mental functioning in so brief a period of time. So when Sebern
of fered to give me a neurofeedback demonstration, I eagerly accepted.
SEEING THE SYMPHONY OF THE BRAIN
At Sebern’ s of fice in Northampton, Massachusetts, she showed me her
neurofeedback equipment—two desktop computers and a small amplifier—
and some of the data she had collected. She then pasted one electrode on
each side of my skull and another on my right ear . Soon the computer in
front of me was displaying rows of brain waves like the ones I’d seen on the
sleep-lab polygraph three decades earlier . Sebern’ s tiny laptop could detect,
record, and display the electrical symphony of my brain faster and more
precisely than what had probably been a million dollars’ worth of
equipment in Hartmann’ s lab.Fr om stick figur es to clearly defined human beings.  After four months of neurofeedback, a
ten-year -old boy’ s family drawings show the equivalent of six years of mental development.
As Sebern explained, feedback provides the brain with a mirror of its
own function: the oscillations and rhythms that underpin the currents and
crosscurrents of the mind. Neurofeedback nudges the brain to make more of
some frequencies and less of others, creating new patterns that enhance its
natural complexity and its bias toward self-regulation.4 “In ef fect,” she told
me, “we may be freeing up innate but stuck oscillatory properties in the
brain and allowing new ones to develop.”Sebern adjusted some settings, “to set the reward and inhibit
frequencies,” as she explained, so that the feedback would reinforce
selected brain-wave patterns while discouraging others. Now I was looking
at something like a video game featuring three spaceships of dif ferent
colors. The computer was emitting irregular tones, and the spaceships were
moving quite randomly . I discovered that when I blinked my eyes they
stopped, and when I calmly stared at the screen they moved in tandem,
accompanied by regular beeps. Sebern then encouraged me to make the
green spaceship move ahead of the others . I leaned forward to concentrate,
but the harder I tried, the more the green spaceship fell behind. She smiled
and told me that I’d do much better if I’d just relax and let my brain take in
the feedback that the computer was generating. So I sat back, and after a
while the tones grew steadier and the green spaceship started pulling ahead
of the others. I felt calm and focused—and my spaceship was winning.
In some ways neurofeedback is similar to watching someone’ s face
during a conversation. If you see smiles or slight nods, you’re rewarded,
and you go on telling your story or making your point. But the moment
your conversation partner looks bored or shifts her gaze, you’ll start to wrap
up or change the topic. In neurofeedback the reward is a tone or movement
on the screen instead of a smile, and the inhibition is far more neutral than a
frown—it’ s simply an undesired pattern.
Next Sebern introduced another feature of neurofeedback: its ability to
track circuitry in specific parts of the brain. She moved the electrodes from
my temples to my left brow , and I started to feel sharp and focused. She told
me she was rewarding beta waves in my frontal cortex, which accounted for
my alertness. When she moved the electrodes to the crown of my head, I
felt more detached from the computer images and more aware of the
sensations in my body . Afterward she showed me a summary graph that
recorded how my brain waves had changed as I experienced subtle shifts in
my mental state and physical sensations.
How could neurofeedback be used to help to treat trauma? As Sebern
explained: “W ith neurofeedback we hope to intervene in the circuitry that
promotes and sustains states of fear and traits of fearfulness, shame, and
rage. It is the repetitive firing of these circuits that defines trauma.” Patients
need help to change the habitual brain patterns created by trauma and its
aftermath. When the fear patterns relax, the brain becomes less susceptibleto automatic stress reactions and better able to focus on ordinary events.
After all, stress is not an inherent property of events themselves—it is a
function of how we label and react to them. Neurofeedback simply
stabilizes the brain and increases resiliency , allowing us to develop more
choices in how to respond.
THE BIR TH OF NEUROFEEDBACK
Neurofeedback was not a new technology in 2007. As early as the late
1950s University of Chicago psychology professor Joe Kamiya, who was
studying the phenomenon of internal perception, had discovered that people
could learn through feedback to tell when they were producing alpha
waves, which are associated with relaxation. (It took some subjects only
four days to reach 100 percent accuracy .) He then demonstrated that they
could also enter voluntarily into an alpha state in response to a simple sound
cue.
In 1968 an article about Kamiya’ s work was published in the popular
magazine Psychology T oday , and the idea that alpha training could relieve
stress and stress-related conditions became widely known.5 The first
scientific work showing that neurofeedback could have an ef fect on
pathological conditions was done by Barry Sterman at UCLA. The National
Aeronautics and Space Administration had asked Sterman to study the
toxicity of a rocket fuel, monomethylhydrazine (MMH), which was known
to cause hallucinations, nausea, and seizures. Sterman had previously
trained some cats to produce a specific EEG frequency known as the
sensorimotor rhythm. (In cats this alert, focused state is associated with
waiting to be fed.) He discovered that while his ordinary lab cats developed
seizures after exposure to MMH, the cats that had received neurofeedback
did not. The training had somehow stabilized their brains.
In 1971 Sterman attached his first human subject, twenty-three-year -old
Mary Fairbanks, to a neurofeedback device. She had suf fered from epilepsy
since the age of eight, with grand mal seizures two or more times a month.
She trained for an hour a day twice a week. At the end of three months she
was virtually seizure free. Sterman subsequently received a grant from theNational Institutes of Health to conduct a more systematic study , and the
impressive results were published in the journal Epilepsia  in 1978.6
This period of experimentation and huge optimism about the potential
of the human mind came to an end in the middle 1970s with newly
discovered psychiatric drugs. Psychiatry and brain science adopted a
chemical model of mind and brain, and other treatment approaches were
relegated to the back burner .
Since then the field of neurofeedback has grown by fits and starts, with
much of the scientific groundwork being done in Europe, Russia, and
Australia. Even though there are about ten thousand neurofeedback
practitioners in the United States, the practice has not been able to garner
the research funding necessary to gain widespread acceptance. One reason
may be that there are multiple competing neurofeedback systems; another is
that the commercial potential is limited. Only a few applications are
covered by insurance, which makes neurofeedback expensive for
consumers and prevents practitioners from amassing the resources
necessary to do lar ge-scale studies.
FROM A HOMELESS SHEL TER T O THE NURSING
ST A TION
Sebern had arranged for me to speak with three of her patients. All told
remarkable stories, but as I listened to twenty-seven-year -old Lisa, who was
studying nursing at a nearby college, I felt myself truly awakening to the
stunning potential of this treatment. Lisa possessed the greatest single
resilience factor humans can have: She was an appealing person—
engaging, curious, and obviously intelligent. She made great eye contact,
and she was eager to share what she had learned about herself. Best of all,
like so many survivors I’ve known, she had a wry sense of humor and a
delicious take on human folly .
Based on what I knew about her background, it was a miracle that she
was so calm and self-possessed. She had spent years in group homes and
mental hospitals, and she was a familiar presence in the emer gency rooms
of western Massachusetts—the girl who regularly arrived by ambulance,half dead from prescription drug overdoses or bloody from self-inflicted
wounds.
Here is how she began her story: “I used to envy the kids who knew
what would happen when their parents got drunk. At least they could
predict the havoc. In my home there was no pattern. Anything could set my
mother of f—eating dinner , watching TV , coming home from school, getting
dressed—and I never knew what she was going to do or how she would
hurt me. It was so random.”
Her father had abandoned the family when Lisa was three years old,
leaving her at the mercy of her psychotic mother . “T orture” is not too strong
a word to describe the abuse she endured. “I lived up in the attic room,” she
told me, “and there was another room up there where I would go and piss
on the carpet because I was too scared to go downstairs to the bathroom. I
would take all the clothes of f my dolls and drive pencils into them and put
them up in my window .”
When she was twelve years old, Lisa ran away from home and was
picked up by the police and returned. After she ran away again, child
protective services stepped in, and she spent the next six years in mental
hospitals, shelters, group homes, foster families, and on the street. No
placement lasted, because Lisa was so dissociated and self-destructive that
she terrified her caretakers. She would attack herself or destroy furniture
and afterward she would not remember what she had done, which earned
her a reputation as a manipulative liar . In retrospect, Lisa told me, she
simply lacked the language to communicate what was going on with her .
When she turned eighteen, she “matured out” of child protective
services and started an independent life, one without family , education,
money , or skills. But shortly after dischar ge she ran into Sebern, who had
just acquired her first neurofeedback equipment and remembered Lisa from
the residential treatment center where she had once worked. She’d always
had a soft spot for this lost girl, and she invited Lisa to try out her new
gizmo.
As Sebern recalled: “When Lisa first came to see me, it was fall. She
walked around with a vacant stare, carrying a pumpkin wherever she went.
There just wasn’ t a there there. I wasn’ t ever sure that I had gotten to any
or ganizing self.” Any form of talk therapy was impossible for Lisa.
Whenever Sebern asked her about anything stressful, she would shut downor go into a panic. In Lisa’ s words: “Every time we tried to talk about what
had happened to me growing up, I would have a breakdown. I would wake
up with cuts and burns and I wouldn’ t be able to eat. I wouldn’ t be able to
sleep.”
Her sense of terror was omnipresent: “I was afraid all the time. I didn’ t
like to be touched. I was always jumpy and nervous. I couldn’ t close my
eyes if another person was around. There was no convincing me that
someone wasn’ t going to kick me the second I closed my eyes. That makes
you feel crazy . Y ou know you’re in a room with someone you trust, you
know intellectually that nothing’ s going to happen to you, but then there’ s
the rest of your body and you can’ t ever relax. If someone put their arm
around me, I would just check out.” She was stuck in a state of inescapable
shock.
Lisa recalled dissociating when she was a little girl, but things got
worse after puberty: “I started waking up with cuts, and people at school
would know me by dif ferent names. I couldn’ t have a steady boyfriend
because I would date other guys when I was dissociated and then not
remember .  I was blacking out a lot and opening my eyes into some pretty
strange situations.” Like many severely traumatized people, Lisa could not
recognize herself in a mirror .7 I had never heard anyone describe so
articulately what it was like to lack a continuous sense of self.
There was no one to confirm her reality . “When I was seventeen and
living in the group home for severely disturbed adolescents, I cut myself up
really badly with the lid of a tin can. They took me to the emer gency room,
but I couldn’ t tell the doctor what I had done to cut myself—I didn’ t have
any memory of it. The ER doctor was convinced that dissociative identity
disorder didn’ t exist. . . . A lot of people involved in mental health tell you
it doesn’ t exist. Not that you don’ t have it, but that it doesn’ t exist.”
The first thing Lisa did after she aged out of her residential treatment
program was to go of f her medications : “This doesn’ t work for everybody ,”
she acknowledged, “but it turned out to be personally the right choice. I
know people who need meds, but that was not the case for me. After going
of f them and starting neurofeedback, I became much clearer .”
When she invited Lisa to do neurofeedback, Sebern had little idea what
to expect, as Lisa would be the first dissociative patient she tried it on. Theymet twice a week and started by rewarding more coherent brain patterns in
the right temporal lobe, the fear center of the brain. After a few weeks Lisa
noticed she was wasn’ t as uptight around people, and she no longer dreaded
the basement laundry room in her building. Then came a bigger
breakthrough: She stopped dissociating. ”I’d always had a constant hum of
low-level conversations in my head,” she recalled. “I was scared I was
schizophrenic. After half a year of neurofeedback I stopped hearing those
noises. I integrated, I guess. Everything just came together .”
As Lisa developed a more continuous sense of self, she became able to
talk about her experiences: “I now can actually talk about things like my
childhood. For the first time I started being able to do  therapy . Up till then I
didn’ t have enough distance and I couldn’ t calm down enough. If you’re
still in it, it’ s hard to talk about it. I wasn’ t able to attach in the way that you
need to attach and open up in the way that you need to open up in order to
have any type of relationship with a therapist.” This was a stunning
revelation: So many patients are in and out of treatment, unable to
meaningfully connect because they are still “in it.”  Of course, when people
don’ t know who they are, they can’ t possibly see the reality of the people
around them.
Lisa went on: “There was so much anxiety around attachment. I would
go into a room and try to memorize every possible way to get out, every
detail about a person. I was trying desperately to keep track of everything
that could hurt me. Now I know people in a dif ferent way . It’ s not based on
memorizing them out of fear . When you’re not afraid of being hurt, you can
know people dif ferently .”
This articulate young woman had emer ged from the depths of despair
and confusion with a degree of clarity and focus I had never seen before. It
was clear that we had to explore the potential of neurofeedback at the
T rauma Center .
GETTING ST AR TED IN NEUROFEEDBACK
First we had to decide which of five dif ferent existing neurofeedback
systems to adopt, and then find a long weekend to learn the principles and
practice on one another .8 Eight staf f members and three trainers volunteeredtheir time to explore the complexities of EEGs, electrodes, and computer -
generated feedback. On the second morning of the training, when I was
partnered with my colleague Michael, I placed an electrode on the right side
of his head, directly over the sensorimotor strip of his brain, and rewarded
the frequency of eleven to fourteen hertz. Shortly after the session ended,
Michael asked for the attention of the group. He’d just had a remarkable
experience, he told us. He had always felt somewhat on edge and unsafe in
the presence of other people, even colleagues like us. Although nobody
seemed to notice—he was, after all, a well-respected therapist—he lived
with a chronic, gnawing sense of danger . That feeling was now gone, and
he felt safe, relaxed, and open. Over the next three years Michael emer ged
from his habitual low profile to challenge the group with his insights and
opinions, and he became one of the most valuable contributors to our
neurofeedback program.
W ith the help of the ANS Foundation we started our first study with a
group of seventeen patients who had not responded to previous treatments.
W e tar geted the right temporal area of the brain, the location that our early
brain-scan studies (described in chapter 3)9 had shown to be excessively
activated during traumatic stress, and gave them twenty neurofeedback
sessions over ten weeks.
Because most of these patients suf fered from alexithymia, it was not
easy for them to report their response to the treatments. But their actions
spoke for them: They consistently showed up on time for their
appointments, even if they had to drive through snowstorms. None of them
dropped out, and at the end of the full twenty sessions, we could document
significant improvements not only in their PTSD scores,10 but also in their
interpersonal comfort, emotional balance, and self-awareness.1 1 They were
less frantic, they slept better , and they felt calmer and more focused.
In any case, self-reports can be unreliable; objective changes in
behavior are much better indicators of how well treatment works. The first
patient I treated with neurofeedback was a good example. He was a
professional man in his early fifties who defined himself as heterosexual,
but he compulsively sought homosexual contact with strangers whenever he
felt abandoned and misunderstood. His marriage had broken up around this
issue, and he had become HIV positive; he was desperate to gain controlover his behavior . During a previous therapy he had talked extensively
about his sexual abuse by an uncle at around the age of eight. W e assumed
that his compulsion was related to that abuse, but making that connection
had made no dif ference in his behavior . After more than a year of regular
psychotherapy with a competent therapist, nothing had changed.
A week after I started to train his brain to produce slower waves in his
right temporal lobe, he had a distressing ar gument with a new girlfriend,
and instead of going to his habitual cruising spot to find sex he decided to
go fishing. I attributed that response to chance. However , over the next ten
weeks, in the midst of his tumultuous relationship, he continued to find
solace in fishing and began to renovate a lakeside cabin. When we skipped
three weeks of neurofeedback because of our vacations schedules, his
compulsion suddenly returned, suggesting that his brain had not yet
stabilized its new pattern. W e trained for six more months, and now , four
years later , I see him about every six months for a checkup. He has felt no
further impulse to engage in his dangerous sexual activities.
How did his brain come to derive comfort from fishing rather than from
compulsive sexual behavior? At this point  we simply don’ t know .
Neurofeedback changes brain connectivity patterns; the mind follows by
creating new patterns of engagement.
BRAIN-W A VE BASICS FROM SLOW T O F AST
Each line on an EEG charts the activity in a dif ferent part of the brain: a
mixture of dif ferent rhythms, ranged on a scale from slow to fast.12 The
EEG consists of measurements of varying heights (amplitude) and
wavelengths (frequency). Frequency refers to the number of times a
waveform rises and falls in one second, and it is measured in hertz (Hz), or
cycles per second (cps). Every frequency on the EEG is relevant to
understanding and treating trauma, and the basics are relatively easy to
grasp.
Delta waves, the slowest frequencies (2–5 Hz) are seen most often
during sleep. The brain is in an idling state, and the mind is turned inward.
If people have too much slow-wave activity while they’re awake, their
thinking is foggy and they exhibit poor judgment and poor impulse control.Eighty percent of children with ADHD and many individuals diagnosed
with PTSD have excessive slow waves in their frontal lobes.
The Electr oencephalogram (EEG).  While there is no typical signature for PTSD, many
traumatized people have sharply increased activity in the temporal lobes, as this patient does
(T 3 , T 4 , T 5 ). Neurofeedback can normalize these abnormal brain patterns and thereby increase
emotional stability .
THE RA TE OF BRAINW A VE FIRING IS RELA TED T O
OUR ST A TE OF AROUSAL
Dreaming speeds up brain waves. Theta frequencies (5–8 Hz) predominate
at the edge of sleep, as in the floating “hypnopompic” state I described inchapter 15 on EMDR; they are also characteristic of hypnotic trance states.
Theta waves create a frame of mind unconstrained by logic or by the
ordinary demands of life and thus open the potential for making novel
connections and associations. One of the most promising EEG
neurofeedback treatments for PTSD, alpha/theta training, makes use of that
quality to loosen frozen associations and facilitate new learning. On the
downside, theta frequencies also occur when we’re “out of it” or depressed.
Alpha waves (8–12 Hz) are accompanied by a sense of peace and
calm.13 They are familiar to anyone who has learned mindfulness
meditation . (A patient once told me that neurofeedback worked for him
“like meditation on steroids.”) I use alpha training most often in my practice
to help people who are either too numb or too agitated to achieve a state of
focused relaxation. W alter Reed National Military Medical Center recently
introduced alpha-training instruments to treat soldiers with PTSD, but at the
time of this writing the results are not yet available.
Beta waves are the fastest frequencies (13–20 Hz). When they
dominate, the brain is oriented to the outside world. Beta enables us to
engage in focused attention while performing a task. However , high beta
(over 20 Hz) is associated with agitation, anxiety , and body tenseness—in
ef fect, we are constantly scanning the environment for danger .
HELPING THE BRAIN T O FOCUS
Neurofeedback training can improve creativity , athletic control, and inner
awareness, even in people who already are highly accomplished.14 When
we started to study neurofeedback, we discovered that sports medicine was
the only department in Boston University that had any familiarity with the
subject. One of my earliest teachers in brain physiology was the sports
psychologist Len Zaichkowsky , who soon left Boston to train the
V ancouver Canucks with neurofeedback.15
Neurofeedback has probably been studied more thoroughly for
performance enhancement than for psychiatric problems. In Italy the trainer
for the soccer club AC Milan used it to help players remain relaxed and
focused as they watched videos of their errors. Their increased mental and
physiological control paid of f when several players joined the Italian teamthat won the 2006 W orld Cup—and when AC Milan won the European
championship the following year .16 Neurofeedback was also included in the
science and technology component of Own the Podium, a $1 17 million,
five-year plan engineered to help Canada dominate the 2010 W inter
Olympics in V ancouver . The Canadians won the most gold medals and
came in third overall.
Musical performance has been shown to benefit as well. A panel of
judges from Britain’ s Royal College of Music found that students who were
trained with ten sessions of neurofeedback by John Gruzelier of the
University of London had a 10 percent improvement in the performance of
a piece of music, compared with students who had not received
neurofeedback. This represents a huge dif ference in such a competitive
field.17
Given its enhancement of focus, attention, and concentration, it’ s not
surprising that neurofeedback drew the attention of specialists in attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). At least thirty-six studies have
shown that neurofeedback can be an ef fective and time-limited treatment
for ADHD—one that’ s about as ef fective as conventional drugs.18 Once the
brain has been trained to produce dif ferent patterns of electrical
communication, no further treatment is necessary , in contrast to drugs,
which do not change fundamental brain activity and work only as long as
the patient keeps taking them.
WHERE IS THE PROBLEM IN MY BRAIN?
Sophisticated computerized EEG analysis, known as the quantitative EEG
(qEEG), can trace brain-wave activity millisecond by millisecond, and its
software can convert that activity into a color map that shows which
frequencies are highest or lowest in key areas of the brain.19 The qEEG can
also show how well brain regions are communicating or working together .
Several lar ge qEEG databases of both normal and abnormal patterns are
available, which allows us to compare a patient’ s qEEG with those of
thousands of other people with similar issues. Last but not least, in contrast
to fMRIs and related scans, the qEEG is both relatively inexpensive and
portable.The qEEG provides compelling evidence of the arbitrary boundaries of
current DSM diagnostic categories. DSM labels for mental illness are not
aligned with specific patterns of brain activation. Mental states that are
common to many diagnoses, such as confusion, agitation, or feeling
disembodied, are associated with specific patterns on the qEEG. In general,
the more problems a patient has, the more abnormalities show up in the
qEEG.20
Our patients find it very helpful to be able to see the patterns of
localized electrical activity in their brains. W e can show them the patterns
that seem to be responsible for their dif ficulty focusing or for their lack of
emotional control. They can see why dif ferent brain areas need to be trained
to generate dif ferent frequencies and communication patterns. These
explanations help them shift from self-blaming attempts to control their
behavior to learning to process information dif ferently .
As Ed Hamlin, who trained us in interpreting the qEEG, recently wrote
to me: “Many people respond to the training, but the ones that respond best
and quickest are those that can see how the feedback is related to something
they are doing. For example, if I’m attempting to help someone increase
their ability to be present, we can see how they’re doing with it. Then the
benefit really begins to accumulate. There is something very empowering
about having the experience of changing your brain’ s activity with your
mind.”
HOW DOES TRAUMA CHANGE BRAIN W A VES?
In our neurofeedback lab we see individuals with long histories of traumatic
stress who have only partially responded to existing treatments. Their
qEEGs show a variety of dif ferent patterns. Often there is excessive activity
in the right temporal lobe, the fear center of the brain, combined with too
much frontal slow-wave activity . This means that their hyperaroused
emotional brains dominate their mental life. Our research showed that
calming the fear center decreases trauma-based problems and improves
executive functioning. This is reflected not only in a significant decrease in
patients’ PTSD scores but also in improved mental clarity and an increasedability to regulate how upset they become in response to relatively minor
provocations.21
Other traumatized patients show patterns of hyperactivity the moment
they close their eyes: Not seeing what is going on around them makes them
panic and their brain waves go wild. W e train them to produce more relaxed
brain patterns. Y et another group overreacts to sounds and light, a sign that
the thalamus has dif ficulty filtering out irrelevant information. In those
patients we focus on changing communication patterns at the back of the
brain.
While our center is focused on finding optimal treatments for long-
standing traumatic stress, Alexander McFarlane is studying how exposure
to combat changes previously normal brains. The Australian Department of
Defence asked his research group to measure the ef fects of deployment to
combat duty in Iraq and Afghanistan on mental and biological functioning,
including brain-wave patterns. In the initial phase McFarlane and his
colleagues measured the qEEG in 179 combat troops four months prior to
and four months after each successive deployment to the Middle East.
They found that the total number of months in combat over a three-year
period was associated with progressive decreases in alpha power at the back
of the brain. This area ,  which monitors the state of the body and regulates
such elementary processes as sleep and hunger , ordinarily has the highest
level of alpha waves of any region in the brain, particularly when people
close their eyes. As we have seen, alpha is associated with relaxation. The
decrease in alpha power in these soldiers reflects a state of persistent
agitation. At the same time the brain waves at the front of the brain, which
normally have high levels of beta, show a progressive slowing with each
deployment. The soldiers gradually develop frontal-lobe activity that
resembles that of children with ADHD, which interferes with their
executive functioning and capacity for focused attention.
The net ef fect is that arousal, which is supposed to provide us with the
ener gy needed to engage in day-to-day tasks, no longer helps these soldiers
to focus on ordinary tasks. It simply makes them agitated and restless. At
this stage of McFarlane’ s study , it  is too early to know  if any of these
soldiers will develop PTSD, and only time will tell to what degree these
brains will readjust to the pace of civilian life.NEUROFEEDBACK AND LEARNING DISABILITIES
Chronic abuse and neglect in childhood interfere with the proper wiring of
sensory-integration systems. In some cases this results in learning
disabilities, which include faulty connections between the auditory and
word-processing systems, and poor hand-eye coordination. As long as they
are frozen or explosive, it is dif ficult to see how much trouble the
adolescents in our residential treatment programs have processing day-to-
day information, but once their behavioral problems have been successfully
treated, their learning disabilities often become manifest. Even if these
traumatized kids could sit still and pay attention, many of them would still
be handicapped by their poor learning skills.22
Lisa described how trauma had interfered with the proper wiring of
basic processing functions. She told me she “always got lost” going places,
and she recalled having a marked auditory delay that kept her from being
able to follow the instructions from her teachers. “Imagine being in a
classroom,” she said, “and the teacher comes in and says, ‘Good morning.
T urn to page two-seventy-two. Do problems one to five.’ If you’re even a
fraction of a second of f, it’ s just a jumble. It was impossible to concentrate.”
Neurofeedback helped her to reverse these learning disabilities. “I
learned to keep track of things; for example, to read maps. Right after we
started therapy , there was this memorable time when I was going from
Amherst to Northampton [less than ten miles] to meet Sebern. I was
supposed to take a couple of buses, but I ended up walking along the
highway for a couple miles. I was that disor ganized—I couldn’ t read the
schedule; I couldn’ t keep track of the time. I was too jacked up and nervous,
which made me tired all the time. I couldn’ t pay attention and keep it
together . I just couldn’ t or ganize my brain around it.”
That statement defines the challenge for brain and mind science: How
can we help people learn to or ganize time and space, distance and
relationships, capacities that are laid down in the brain during the first few
years of life, if early trauma has interfered with their development? Neither
drugs nor conventional therapy have been shown to activate the
neuroplasticity necessary to bring those capacities online after the critical
periods have passed. Now is the time to study whether neurofeedback can
succeed where other interventions have failed.ALPHA-THET A TRAINING
Alpha-theta training is a particularly fascinating neurofeedback procedure,
because it can induce the sorts of hypnagogic states—the essence of
hypnotic trance—that are discussed in chapter 15.23 When theta waves
predominate in the brain, the mind’ s focus is on the internal world, a world
of free-floating imagery . Alpha brain waves may act as a bridge from the
external world to the internal, and vice versa. In alpha-theta training these
frequencies are alternately rewarded.
The challenge in PTSD is to open the mind to new possibilities, so that
the present is no longer interpreted as a continuous reliving of the past.
T rance states, during which theta activity dominates, can help to loosen the
conditioned connections between particular stimuli and responses, such as
loud cracks signaling gunfire, a harbinger of death. A new association can
be created in which that same crack can come to be linked to Fourth of July
fireworks at the end of a day at the beach with loved ones.
In the twilight states fostered by alpha/theta training, traumatic events
may be safely reexperienced and new associations fostered. Some patients
report unusual imagery and/or deep insights about their life; others simply
become more relaxed and less rigid. Any state in which people can safely
experience images, feelings, and emotions that are associated with dread
and helplessness is likely to create fresh potential and a wider perspective.
Can alpha-theta reverse hyperarousal patterns? The accumulated
evidence is promising. Eugene Peniston and Paul Kulkosky , researchers at
the V A Medical Center in Fort L yon, Colorado, used neurofeedback to treat
twenty-nine V ietnam veterans with a twelve- to- fifteen-year history of
chronic combat-related PTSD. Fifteen of the men were randomly assigned
to the EEG alpha-theta training and fourteen to a control  group that
received standard medical care, including psychotropic drugs and individual
and group therapy . On average, participants in both groups had been
hospitalized more than five times for their PTSD. The neurofeedback
facilitated twilight states of learning by rewarding both alpha and theta
waves. As the men lay back in a recliner with their eyes closed, they were
coached to allow the neurofeedback sounds to guide them into deep
relaxation. They were also asked to use positive mental imagery (forexample, being sober , living confidently and happily) as they moved toward
the trancelike alpha-theta state.
This study , published in 1991, had one of the best outcomes ever
recorded for PTSD. The neurofeedback group had a significant decrease in
their PTSD symptoms, as well as in physical complaints, depression,
anxiety , and paranoia. After the treatment phase the veterans and their
family members were contacted monthly for a period of thirty months. Only
three of the fifteen neurofeedback-treated veterans reported disturbing
flashbacks and nightmares. All three chose to under go ten booster sessions;
only one needed to return to the hospital for further treatment. Fourteen out
of fifteen were using significantly less medication.
In contrast, every vet in the comparison group experienced an increase
in PTSD symptoms during the follow-up period, and all of them required at
least two further hospitalizations. T en of the comparison group also
increased their medication use.24 This study has been replicated by other
researchers, but it has received surprisingly little attention outside the
neurofeedback community .25
NEUROFEEDBACK, PTSD, AND ADDICTION
Approximately one-third to one-half of severely traumatized people
develop substance abuse problems.26 Since the time of Homer , soldiers
have used alcohol to numb their pain, irritability , and depression. In one
recent study half of motor vehicle accident victims developed problems
with drugs or alcohol. Alcohol abuse makes people careless and thus
increases their chances of being traumatized again (although being drunk
during an assault actually decreases the likelihood of developing PTSD).
There is a circular relationship between PTSD and substance abuse:
While drugs and alcohol may provide temporary relief from trauma
symptoms, withdrawing from them increases hyperarousal, thereby
intensifying nightmares, flashbacks, and irritability . There are only two
ways to end this vicious cycle: by resolving the symptoms of PTSD with
methods such as EMDR or by treating the hyperarousal that is part of both
PTSD and withdrawal from drugs or alcohol. Drugs such as naltrexone aresometimes prescribed to reduce hyperarousal, but this treatment helps in
only some cases.
One of the first women I trained with neurofeedback had a long-
standing cocaine addiction, in addition to a horrendous childhood history of
sexual abuse and abandonment. Much to my surprise, her cocaine habit
cleared after the first two sessions and on follow-up five years later had not
returned. I had never seen anyone recover this quickly from severe drug
abuse, so I turned to the existing scientific literature for guidance.27 Most of
the studies on this subject were done more than two decades ago; in recent
years, very few neurofeedback studies for the treatment of addiction have
been published, at least in the United States.
Between 75 percent and 80 percent of patients who are admitted for
detox and alcohol and drug abuse treatment will relapse. Another study by
Peniston and Kulkosky—on the ef fects of neurofeedback training with
veterans who had dual diagnoses of alcoholism and PTSD28—focused on
this problem . Fifteen veterans received alpha-theta training, while the
control group received standard treatment without neurofeedback. The
subjects were followed up regularly for three years, during which eight
members of neurofeedback group stopped drinking completely and one got
drunk once but became sick and didn’ t drink again. Most of them were
markedly less depressed. As Peniston put it, the changes reported
corresponded to being “more warmhearted, more intelligent, more
emotionally stable, more socially bold, more relaxed and more satisfied.”29
In contrast, all of those given standard treatment were readmitted to the
hospital within eighteen months.30 Since that time a number of studies on
neurofeedback for addictions have been published,31 but this important
application needs much more research to establish its potential and
limitations.
THE FUTURE OF NEUROFEEDBACK
In my practice I use neurofeedback primarily to help with the hyperarousal,
confusion, and concentration problems of people who suf fer from
developmental trauma. However , it has also shown good results for
numerous issues and conditions that go beyond the scope of this book,including relieving tension headaches, improving cognitive functioning
following a traumatic brain injury , reducing anxiety and panic attacks,
learning to deepen meditation states, treating autism, improving seizure
control, self-regulation in mood disorders, and more. As of 2013
neurofeedback is being used in seventeen military and V A facilities to treat
PTSD,32 and scientific documentation of its ef ficacy in recent combat vets
is just beginning to be assessed. Frank Duf fy , the director of the clinical
neurophysiology and developmental neurophysiology laboratories of
Boston Children’ s Hospital, has commented: “The literature, which lacks
any negative study , suggests that neurofeedback plays a major therapeutic
role in many dif ferent areas. In my opinion, if any medication had
demonstrated such a wide spectrum of ef ficacy it would be universally
accepted and widely used.”33
Many questions remain to be answered about treatment protocols for
neurofeedback, but the scientific paradigm is gradually shifting in a
direction that invites a deeper exploration of these questions. In 2010
Thomas Insel, director of the National Institute of Mental Health, published
an article in Scientific American entitled “Faulty Circuits,” in which he
called for a return to understanding mind and brain in terms of the rhythms
and patterns of electrical communication: “Brain regions that function
together to carry out normal (and abnormal) mental operations can be
thought of as analogous to electrical circuits—the latest research shows that
the malfunctioning of entire circuits may underlie many mental
disorders.”34 Three years later Insel announced that NIMH was “re-
orienting its research away from DSM categories”35 and focusing instead
on “disorders of the human connectome.”36
As explained by Francis Collins, director of the National Institutes of
Health (of which NIMH is a part), “The connectome refers to the
exquisitely interconnected network of neurons (nerve cells) in your brain.
Like the genome, the microbiome, and other exciting ‘ome’ fields, the ef fort
to map the connectome and decipher the electrical signals that zap through
it to generate your thoughts, feelings, and behaviors has become possible
through development of powerful new tools and technologies.”37 The
connectome is now being mapped in detail under the auspices of NIMH.As we await the results of this research, I’d like to give the last word to
Lisa, the survivor who introduced me to the enormous potential of
neurofeedback. When I asked her to summarize what the treatment had
done for her , she said: “It calmed me down. It stopped the dissociation. I
can use my feelings; I’m not running away from them. I’m not held hostage
by them. I can’ t turn them of f and on, but I can put them away . I may be sad
about the abuse I went through, but I can put it away . I can call a friend and
not talk about it if I don’ t want to talk about it ,  or I can do homework or
clean my apartment. Emotions mean something now . I’m not anxious all the
time, and when I am anxious, I can reflect on it. If the anxiety’ s coming
from the past, I can find it there, or I can look at how it relates to my life
now . And it’ s not just negative emotions, like anger and anxiety—I can
reflect on love and intimacy or sexual attraction. I’m not in fight-or -flight
all the time. My blood pressure is down. I’m not physically prepared to take
of f at any moment or defend myself against an attack. Neurofeedback made
it possible for me to have a relationship. Neurofeedback freed me up to live
my life the way I want to, because I’m not always in the thrall of how I was
hurt and what it did to me.”
Four years after I met her and recorded our conversations, Lisa
graduated near the top of her nursing school class, and she now works full
time as a nurse at a local hospital.MC H A P T E R  2 0
F I N D I N G  Y O U R  V O I C E :  C O M M U N A L
R H Y T H M S  A N D  T H E A T E R
Acting is not about putting on a character but discovering the
character within you: you are the character , you just have to find it
within yourself—albeit a very expanded version of yourself.
—T ina Packer
any scientists I know were inspired by their children’ s health
problems to find new ways of understanding mind, brain, and
therapy . My own son’ s recovery from a mysterious illness that, for lack of a
better name, we call chronic fatigue syndrome, convinced me of the
therapeutic possibilities of theater .
Nick spent most of seventh and eighth grade in bed, bloated by
aller gies and medications that left him too exhausted to go to school. His
mother and I saw him becoming entrenched in his identity as a self-hating
and isolated kid, and we were desperate to help him. When his mother
realized that he picked up a little ener gy round 5:00 p.m., we signed him up
for an evening class in improvisational theater where he would at least have
a chance to interact with other boys and girls his age. He took to the group
and to the acting exercises and soon landed his first role, as Action in W est
Side Story , a tough kid who’ s always ready to fight and has the lead in
singing “Gee, Of ficer Krupke.” One day at home I caught him walking with
a swagger , practicing what it was like to be somebody with clout. W as hedeveloping a physical sense of pleasure, imagining himself as a strong guy
who commands respect?
Then he was cast as the Fonz in Happy Days.  Being adored by girls and
keeping an audience spellbound became the real tipping point in his
recovery . Unlike his experience with the numerous therapists who had
talked with him about how bad he felt, theater gave him a chance to deeply
and physically experience what it was like to be someone other than the
learning-disabled, oversensitive boy that he had gradually become. Being a
valued contributor to a group gave him a visceral experience of power and
competence. I believe that this new embodied version of himself set him on
the road to becoming the creative, loving adult he is today .
Our sense of agency , how much we feel in control, is defined by our
relationship with our bodies and its rhythms: Our waking and sleeping and
how we eat, sit, and walk define the contours of our days. In order to find
our voice, we have to be in  our bodies—able to breathe fully and able to
access our inner sensations. This is the opposite of dissociation, of being
“out of body” and making yourself disappear . It’ s also the opposite of
depression, lying slumped in front of a screen that provides passive
entertainment. Acting is an experience of using your body to take your
place in life.
THE THEA TER OF W AR
Nick’ s transformation was not the first time I’d witnessed the benefits of
theater . In 1988 I was still treating three veterans with PTSD whom I’d met
at the V A, and when they showed a sudden improvement in their vitality ,
optimism, and family relationships, I attributed it to my growing therapeutic
skills. Then I discovered that all three were involved in a theatrical
production.
W anting to dramatize the plight of homeless veterans, they had
persuaded playwright David Mamet, who was living nearby , to meet
weekly with their group to develop a script around their experiences.
Mamet then recruited Al Pacino, Donald Sutherland, and Michael J. Fox to
come to Boston for an evening called Sketches of W ar , which raised money
to convert the V A clinic where I’d met my patients into a shelter forhomeless veterans.1 Standing on a stage with professional actors, speaking
about  their memories of the war ,  and reading their poetry was clearly a
more transformative experience than any therapy could have of fered them.
Since time immemorial human beings have used communal rituals to
cope with their most powerful and terrifying feelings. Ancient Greek
theater , the oldest of which we have written records, seems to have grown
out of religious rites that involved dancing, singing, and reenacting
mythical stories. By the fifth century BCE, theater played a central role in
civic life, with the audience seated in a horseshoe around the stage, which
enabled them to see one another ’ s emotions and reactions.
Greek drama may have served as a ritual reintegration for combat
veterans. At the time Aeschylus wrote the Or esteia trilogy , Athens was at
war on six fronts; the cycle of tragedy is set in motion when the returning
warrior king Agamemnon is murdered by his wife, Clytemnestra, for
having sacrificed their daughter before sailing to the T rojan W ar . Military
service was required of every adult citizen of Athens, so audiences were
undoubtedly composed of combat veterans and active-duty soldiers on
leave. The performers themselves must have been citizen-soldiers.
Sophocles was a general of ficer in Athens’ s wars against the Persians,
and his play Ajax , which ends with the suicide of one of the T rojan W ar ’ s
greatest heroes, reads like a textbook description of traumatic stress. In
2008 writer and director Bryan Doerries arranged a reading of Ajax  for five
hundred marines  in San Diego and was stunned by the reception it received.
(Like many of us who work with trauma, Doerries’ s inspiration was
personal; he had studied classics in college and turned to the Greek texts for
comfort when he lost a girlfriend to cystic fibrosis.) His project “The
Theater of W ar” evolved from that first event, and with funding from the
U.S. Department of Defense, this 2,500-year -old play has since been
performed more than two hundred times here and abroad to give voice to
the plight of combat veterans and foster dialogue and understanding in their
families and friends.2
Theater of W ar performances are followed by a town hall–style
discussion. I attended a reading of Ajax  in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
shortly after the news media had publicized a 27 percent increase in
suicides among combat veterans over the previous three years. Some fortypeople—V ietnam veterans, military wives, recently dischar ged men and
women who had served in Iraq and Afghanistan—lined up behind the
microphone. Many of them quoted lines from the play as they spoke about
their sleepless nights, drug addiction, and alienation from their families.
The atmosphere was electric, and afterward the audience huddled in the
foyer , some holding each other and crying, others in deep conversation.
As Doerries later said: “Anyone who has come into contact with
extreme pain, suf fering or death has no trouble understanding Greek drama.
It’ s all about bearing witness to the stories of veterans.”3
KEEPING T OGETHER IN TIME
Collective movement and music create a lar ger context for our lives, a
meaning beyond our individual fate. Religious rituals universally involve
rhythmic movements, from davening at the W ailing W all in Jerusalem to
the sung litur gy and gestures of the Catholic Mass to moving meditation in
Buddhist ceremonies and the rhythmic prayer rituals performed five times a
day by devout Muslims.
Music was a backbone of the civil rights movement in the United
States. Anyone alive at that time will not for get the lines of marchers, arms
linked, singing “W e Shall Overcome” as they walked steadily toward the
police who were massed to stop them. Music binds together people who
might individually be terrified but who collectively become powerful
advocates for themselves and others. Along with language, dancing,
marching, and singing are uniquely human ways to install a sense of hope
and courage.
I observed the force of communal rhythms in action when I watched
Archbishop Desmond T utu conduct public hearings for the T ruth and
Reconciliation Commission in South Africa in 1996. These events were
framed by collective singing and dancing. W itnesses recounted the
unspeakable atrocities that had been inflicted on them and their families.
When they became overwhelmed, T utu would interrupt their testimony and
lead the entire audience in prayer , song, and dance until the witnesses could
contain their sobbing and halt their physical collapse. This enabled
participants to pendulate in and out of reliving their horror and eventually tofind words to describe what had happened to them. I fully credit T utu and
the other member of the commission with averting what might have been an
or gy of revenge, as is so common when victims are finally set free.
A few years ago I discovered Keeping T ogether in T ime ,4 written by the
great historian W illiam H. McNeill near the end of his career . This short
book examines the historical role of dance and military drill in creating
what McNeill calls “muscular bonding” and sheds a new light on the
importance of theater , communal dance, and movement. It also solved a
long-standing puzzle in my own mind. Having been raised in the
Netherlands, I had always wondered how a group of simple Dutch peasants
and fishermen had won their liberation from the mighty Spanish empire.
The Eighty Y ears’ W ar , which lasted from the late sixteenth to the
midseventeenth century , began as a series of guerrilla actions, and it seemed
destined to remain that way , since the ill-disciplined, ill-paid soldiers
regularly fled under volleys of musket fire.
This changed when Prince Maurice of Orange became the leader of the
Dutch rebels. Still in his early twenties, he had recently completed his
schooling in Latin, which enabled him to read 1,500-year -old Roman
manuals on military tactics. He learned that the Roman general L ycur gus
had introduced marching in step to the Roman legions and that the historian
Plutarch had attributed their invincibility to this practice: “It was at once a
magnificent and terrible sight, to see them march on to the tune of their
flutes, without any disorder in their ranks, any discomposure in their minds
or change in their countenances, calmly and cheerfully moving with music
to the deadly fight.”5
Prince Maurice instituted close-order drill, accompanied by drums,
flutes, and trumpets, in his ragtag army . This collective ritual not only
provided his men with a sense of purpose and solidarity , but also made it
possible for them to execute complicated maneuvers. Close-order drill
subsequently spread across Europe, and to this day the major services of the
U.S. military spend liberally on their marching bands, even though fifes and
drums no longer accompany troops into battle.
Neuroscientist Jaak Panksepp, who was born in the tiny Baltic country
of Estonia, told me the remarkable story of Estonia’ s “Singing Revolution.”
In June 1987, on one of those endless sub-Arctic summer evenings, morethan ten thousand concertgoers at the T allinn Song Festival Grounds linked
hands and began to sing patriotic songs that had been forbidden during half
a century of Soviet occupation. These songfests and protests continued, and
on September 1 1, 1988, three hundred thousand people, about a quarter of
the population of Estonia, gathered to sing and make a public demand for
independence. By August 1991 the Congress of Estonia had proclaimed the
restoration of the Estonian state, and when Soviet tanks attempted to
intervene, people acted as human shields to protect T allinn’ s radio and TV
stations. As a columnist noted in the New Y ork T imes : “Imagine the scene in
Casablanca  in which the French patrons sing “La Marseillaise” in defiance
of the Germans, then multiply its power by a factor of thousands, and
you’ve only begun to imagine the force of the Singing Revolution.”6
TREA TING TRAUMA THROUGH THEA TER
It is surprising how little research exists on how collective ceremonies
af fect the mind and brain and how they might prevent or alleviate trauma.
Over the past decade, however , I have had a chance to observe and study
three dif ferent programs for treating trauma through theater: Urban Improv
in Boston7 and the T rauma Drama program it inspired in the Boston public
schools and in our residential centers;8 the Possibility Project, directed by
Paul Grif fin in New Y ork City;9 and Shakespeare & Company , in Lenox,
Massachusetts, which runs a program for juvenile of fenders called
Shakespeare in the Courts.10 In this chapter , I’ll focus on these three groups,
but there are many excellent therapeutic drama programs in the United
States and abroad, making theater a widely available resource for recovery .
Despite their dif ferences, all of these programs share a common
foundation: confrontation of the painful realities of life and symbolic
transformation through communal action. Love and hate, aggression and
surrender , loyalty and betrayal are the stuf f of theater and the stuf f of
trauma. As a culture we are trained to cut ourselves of f from the truth of
what we’re feeling. In the words of T ina Packer , the charismatic founder of
Shakespeare & Company: “T raining actors involves training people to go
against that tendency—not only to feel deeply , but to convey that feeling atevery moment to the audience, so the audience will get it—and not close of f
against it.”
T raumatized people are terrified to feel deeply . They are afraid to
experience their emotions, because emotions lead to loss of control. In
contrast, theater is about embodying emotions, giving voice to them,
becoming rhythmically engaged, taking on and embodying dif ferent roles.
As we’ve seen, the essence of trauma is feeling godforsaken, cut of f
from the human race. Theater involves a collective confrontation with the
realities of the human condition. As Paul Grif fin, discussing his theater
program for foster -care children, told me: “The stuf f of tragedy in theater
revolves around coping with betrayal, assault, and destruction. These kids
have no trouble understanding what Lear , Othello, Macbeth, or Hamlet are
all about.” In T ina Packer ’ s words: “Everything is about using the whole
body and having other bodies resonate with your feelings, emotions and
thoughts.” Theater gives trauma survivors a chance to connect with one
another by deeply experiencing their common humanity .
T raumatized people are afraid of conflict. They fear losing control and
ending up on the losing side once again. Conflict is central to theater—inner
conflicts, interpersonal conflicts, family conflicts, social conflicts, and their
consequences. T rauma is about trying to for get, hiding how scared, enraged,
or helpless you are. Theater is about finding ways of telling the truth and
conveying deep truths to your audience. This requires pushing through
blockages to discover your own truth, exploring and examining your own
internal experience so that it can emer ge in your voice and body on stage.
MAKING IT SAFE T O ENGAGE
These theater programs are not for aspiring actors but for angry , frightened,
and obstreperous teenagers or withdrawn, alcoholic, burned-out veterans.
When they come to rehearsal, they slump into their chairs, fearful that
others will immediately see what failures they are. T raumatized adolescents
are a jumble: inhibited, out of tune, inarticulate, uncoordinated, and
purposeless. They are too hyperaroused to notice what is going on around
them. They are easily triggered and rely on action rather than words to
dischar ge their feelings.All the directors I’ve worked with agree that the secret is to go slow
and engage them bit by bit. The initial challenge is simply to get
participants to be more present in the room. Here’ s Kevin Coleman, director
of Shakespeare in the Courts, describing his work with teens when I
interviewed him: “First we get them up and walking around the room. Then
we start to create a balance in the space, so they’re not walking aimlessly ,
but become aware of other people. Gradually , with little prompts, it
becomes more complex: Just walk on your toes, or on your heels, or walk
backwards. Then, when you bump into someone, scream and fall down.
After maybe thirty prompts, they’re out there waving their arms in the air ,
and we get to a full-body warm up, but it’ s incremental. If you take too big
a jump, you’ll see them hit the wall.
“Y ou have to make it safe for them to notice each other . Once their
bodies are a little more free, I might use the prompt: ‘Don’ t make eye
contact with anyone—just look at the floor .’ Most of them are thinking:
‘Great, I’m doing that already ,’ but then I say ‘Now begin to notice people
as you go by , but don’ t let them see you looking.’ And next: ‘Just make eye
contact for a second.’ Then: ‘Now , no eye contact . . . now , contact . . . now ,
no contact. Now , make eye contact and hold  it . . . too long. Y ou’ll know
when it’ s too long because you’ll either want to start dating that person or to
have a fight with them. That’ s when it’ s too long.’
“They don’ t make that kind of extended eye contact in their normal
lives, not even with a person they’re talking to. They don’ t know if that
person is safe or not. So what you’re doing is making it safe for them not to
disappear when they make eye contact, or when someone looks at them. Bit
by bit, by bit, by bit . . .”
T raumatized adolescents are noticeably out of sync. In the T rauma
Center ’ s T rauma Drama program, we use mirroring exercises to help them
to get in tune with one another . They move their right arm up, and their
partner mirrors it; they twirl, and their partner twirls in response. They
begin to observe how body movements and facial expressions change, how
their own natural movements dif fer from those of others, and how
unaccustomed movements and expressions make them feel. Mirroring
loosens their preoccupation with what other people think of them and helps
them attune viscerally , not cognitively , to someone else’ s experience. Whenmirroring ends in giggles, it’ s a sure indication that our participants feel
safe.
In order to become real partners, they also need to learn to trust one
another . An exercise in which one person is blindfolded while his partner
leads him by the hand is especially tough for our kids. It’ s often as
terrifying for them to be the leader , to be trusted by someone vulnerable, as
it is to be blindfolded and led. At first they may last for only ten or twenty
seconds, but we gradually work them up to five minutes. Afterward some of
them have to go of f by themselves for a while, because it is so emotionally
overwhelming to feel these connections.
The traumatized kids and veterans we work with are embarrassed to be
seen, afraid to be in touch with what they are feeling, and they keep one
another at arm’ s length. The job of any director , like that of any therapist, is
to slow things down so the actors can establish a relationship with
themselves, with their bodies. Theater of fers a unique way to access a full
range of emotions and physical sensations that not only put them in touch
with the habitual “set” of their bodies, but also let them explore alternative
ways of engaging with life.
URBAN IMPROV
My son loved his theater group, which was run by Urban Improv (UI), a
long-standing Boston arts institution. He stayed with them through high
school and then volunteered to work with them the summer after his
freshman year in college. It was then that he learned that UI’ s violence
prevention program, which has run hundreds of workshops in local schools
since 1992, had received a research grant to assess its ef ficacy—and that
they were looking for someone to head the study . Nick suggested to the
directors, Kippy Dewey and Cissa Campion, that his dad would be the ideal
person for the job. Luckily for me, they agreed.
I began to visit schools with UI’ s multicultural ensemble, which
included a director , four professional actor -educators, and a musician.
Urban Improv creates scripted skits depicting the kinds of problems that
students face every day: exclusion from peer groups, jealousy , rivalry and
anger , and family strife. Skits for older students also address issues likedating, STDs, homophobia, and peer violence. In a typical presentation the
professional actors might portray a group of kids excluding a newcomer
from a lunch table in the cafeteria. As the scene approaches a choice point
—for example, the new student responds to their put-downs—the director
freezes the action. A member of the class is then invited to replace one of
the actors and show how he or she would feel and behave in this situation.
These scenarios enable the students to observe day-to-day problems with
some emotional distance while experimenting with various solutions: W ill
they confront the tormenters, talk to a friend, call the homeroom teacher ,
tell their parents what happened?
Another volunteer is then asked to try a dif ferent approach, so that
students can see how other choices might play out. Props and costumes help
the participants take risks in new roles, as do the playful atmosphere and the
support from the actors. In the discussion groups afterward students respond
to questions like “How was this scene similar or dif ferent from what
happens in your school?” “How do you get the respect that you need?” and
“How do you settle your dif ferences?” These discussions become lively
exchanges as many students volunteer their thoughts and ideas.
Our T rauma Center team evaluated this program at two grade levels in
seventeen participating schools. Classrooms that participated in the UI
program were compared with similar nonparticipating classrooms. At the
fourth-grade level, we found a significant positive response. On
standardized rating scales for aggression, cooperation, and self-control,
students in the UI group showed substantially fewer fights and angry
outbursts, more cooperation and self-assertion with peers, and more
attentiveness and engagement in the classroom.1 1
Much to our surprise, these results were not matched by the eighth
graders. What had happened in the interim that af fected their responses? At
first we had only our personal impressions to go on. When I’d visited the
fourth-grade classes, I’d been struck by their wide-eyed innocence and their
eagerness to participate. The eighth graders, in contrast, were often sullen
and defensive and as a group seemed to have lost their spontaneity and
enthusiasm. Onset of puberty was one obvious factor for the change, but
might there be others?When we delved further , we found that the older children had
experienced more than twice as much trauma as the younger ones: Every
single eighth grader in these typical American inner -city schools had
witnessed serious violence. T wo-thirds had observed five or more incidents,
including stabbings, gunfights, killings, and domestic assaults. Our data
showed that eighth graders with such high levels of exposure to violence
were significantly more aggressive than students without these histories and
that the program made no significant dif ference in their behavior .
The T rauma Center team decided to see if we could turn this situation
around with a longer and more intensive program that focused on team
building and emotion-regulation exercises, using scripts that dealt directly
with the kinds of violence these kids experienced. For several months
members of our staf f, led by Joseph Spinazzola, met weekly with the UI
actors to work on script development. The actors taught our psychologists
improvisation, mirroring, and precise physical attunement so they could
credibly portray melting down, confronting, cowering, or collapsing. W e
taught the actors about trauma triggers and how to recognize and deal with
trauma reenactments.12
During the winter and spring of 2005, we tested the resulting program
at a specialized day school run jointly by the Boston Public Schools and the
Massachusetts Department of Correction.  This was a chaotic environment
in which students often shuttled back and forth between school and jail. All
of them came from high-crime neighborhoods and had been exposed to
horrendous violence; I had never seen such an aggressive and sullen group
of kids. W e got a glimpse into the lives of the innumerable middle school
and high school teachers who deal daily with students whose first response
to new challenges is to lash out or go into defiant withdrawal.
W e were shocked to discover that, in scenes where someone was in
physical danger , the students always sided with the aggressors. Because
they could not tolerate any sign of weakness in themselves, they could not
accept it in others. They showed nothing but contempt for potential victims,
yelling things like, “Kill the bitch, she deserves it,” during a skit about
dating violence.
At first some of the professional actors wanted to give up—it was
simply too painful to see how mean these kids were—but they stuck it out,and I was amazed to see how they gradually got the students to experiment,
however reluctantly , with new roles. T oward the end of the program, a few
students were even volunteering for parts that involved showing
vulnerability or fear . When they received  their certificate of completion,
several shyly gave the actors drawings to express their appreciation. I
detected a few tears, possibly even in myself.
Our attempt to make T rauma Drama a regular part of the eighth-grade
curriculum in the Boston public schools unfortunately ran into a wall of
bureaucratic resistance. Nonetheless, it lives on as an integral part of the
residential treatment programs at the Justice Resource Institute, while
music, theater , art, and sports—timeless ways of fostering competence and
collective bonding—continue to disappear from our schools.
THE POSSIBILITY PROJECT
In Paul Grif fin’ s New Y ork City Possibility Project the actors are not
presented with prepared scripts. Instead, over a nine-month period they
meet for three hours a week, write their own full-length musical, and
perform it for several hundred people. During its twenty-year history the
Possibility Project has accrued a stable staf f and strong traditions. Each
production team is made up of recent graduates who, with the help of
professional actors, dancers, and musicians, or ganize scriptwriting, scenic
design, choreography , and rehearsals for the incoming class. These recent
grads are powerful role models. As Paul told me: “When they come into the
program, students believe they cannot make a dif ference; putting a program
like this together is a transforming experience for their future.”
In 2010 Paul started a new program specifically for foster -care youth.
This is a troubled population: Five years after maturing out of care, some 60
percent will have been convicted of a crime, 75 percent will be on public
assistance, and only 6 percent will have completed even a community
college degree.
The T rauma Center treats many foster care kids, but Grif fin gave me a
new way to see their lives: “Understanding foster care is like learning about
a foreign country . If you’re not from there, you don’ t speak the language.
Life is upside down for foster -care youth.” The security and love that otherchildren take for granted they have to create for themselves. When Grif fin
says, “Life is upside down,” he means that if you treat kids in foster care
with love or generosity , they often don’ t know what to make of it or how to
respond. Rudeness feels more familiar; cynicism they understand.
As Grif fin points out, “Abandonment makes it impossible to trust, and
kids who have gone through foster care understand abandonment. Y ou can
have no impact until they trust you.” Foster -care children often answer to
multiple people in char ge. If they want to switch schools, for example, they
have to deal with foster parents, school of ficials, the foster -care agency , and
sometimes a judge. This tends to make them politically savvy , and they
learn all too well how to play people.
In the foster -care world, “permanency” is a big buzzword. The motto is
“One caring adult—that’ s all you need.” However , it is natural for teenagers
to pull away from adults, and Grif fin remarks that the best form of
permanency for teens is a steady group of friends—which the program is
designed to provide. Another foster -care buzzword is “independence,”
which Paul counters with “ inter dependence.” “W e’re all interdependent,”
he points out. “The idea that we’re asking our young people to go out in the
world completely alone and call themselves independent is crazy . W e need
to teach them how to be interdependent, which means teaching them how to
have relationships.”
Paul found that foster -care youth are natural actors. Playing tragic
characters, you have to express emotions and create a reality that comes
from a place of depth and sorrow and hurt. Y oung people in foster care?
That’ s all they know . It’ s life and death every day for them. Over time,
collaboration helps the kids become important people in one another ’ s lives.
Phase one of the program is group building. The first rehearsal establishes
basic agreements: responsibility , accountability , respect; yes to expressions
of af fection, no to sexual contact in the group. They then begin singing and
moving together , which gets them in sync.
Now comes phase two: sharing life stories. They are now listening to
one another , discovering shared experiences, breaking through the
loneliness and isolation of trauma. Paul gave me a film that shows how this
happened in one group. When the kids are first asked to say or do
something to introduce themselves, they freeze, their faces expressionless,
their eyes cast down, doing anything they can to become invisible.As they begin to talk, as they discover a voice in which they themselves
are central, they also begin to create their own show . Paul makes it clear the
production depends on their input: “If you could write a musical or play ,
what would you put in it? Punishment? Revenge? Betrayal? Loss? This is
your show to write.” Everything they say is written down, and some of
them start to put their own words on paper . As a script emer ges, the
production team incorporates the students’ precise words into the songs and
dialogue. The group will learn that if they can embody their experiences
well enough, other people will listen. They will learn to feel what they feel
and know what they know .
The focus changes naturally as rehearsals begin. The foster kids’
history of pain, alienation, and fear is no longer central, and the emphasis
shifts to “How can I become the best actor , singer , dancer , choreographer ,
or lighting and set designer I can possibly be?” Being able to perform
becomes the critical issue: Competence is the best defense against the
helplessness of trauma.
This is, of course, true for all of us. When the job goes bad, when a
cherished project fails, when someone you count on leaves you or dies,
there are few things as helpful as moving your muscles and doing
something that demands focused attention. Inner -city schools and
psychiatric programs often lose sight of this. They want the kids to behave
“normally”—without building the competencies that will make them feel
normal.
Theater programs also teach cause and ef fect. A foster kid’ s life is
completely unpredictable. Anything can happen without notice: being
triggered and having a meltdown; seeing a parent arrested or killed; being
moved from one home to another; getting yelled at for things that got you
approval in your last placement. In a theatrical production they see the
consequences of their decisions and actions laid out directly before their
eyes. “If you want to give them a sense of control, you have to give them
power over their destiny rather than intervene on their behalf,” Paul
explains. “Y ou cannot help, fix, or save the young people you are working
with. What you can do is work side by side with them, help them to
understand their vision, and realize it with them. By doing that you give
them back control. W e’re healing trauma without anyone ever mentioning
the word.”SENTENCED T O SHAKESPEARE
For the teenagers attending sessions of Shakespeare in the Courts, there is
no improvisation, no building scripts around their own lives. They are all
“adjudicated of fenders” found guilty of fighting, drinking, stealing, and
property crimes, and a Berkshire County Juvenile Court judge has
sentenced them to six weeks, four afternoons a week, of intensive acting
study . Shakespeare is a foreign country for these actors. As Kevin Coleman
told me, when they first turn up—angry , suspicious, and in shock—they’re
convinced that they’d rather go to jail. Instead they’re going to learn the
lines of Hamlet, or Mark Antony , or Henry V and then go onstage in a
condensed performance of an entire Shakespeare play before an audience of
family , friends, and representatives of the juvenile justice system.
W ith no words to express the ef fects of their capricious upbringing,
these adolescents act out their emotions with violence. Shakespeare calls for
sword fighting, which, like other martial arts, gives them an opportunity to
practice contained aggression and expressions of physical power . The
emphasis is on keeping everyone safe. The kids love swordplay , but to keep
one another safe they have to negotiate and use language.
Shakespeare was writing at a time of transition, when the world was
moving from primarily oral to written communication—when most people
were still signing their name with an X . These kids are facing their own
period of transition; many are barely articulate, and some struggle to read at
all. If they rely on four -letter words, it’ s not only to show they’re tough but
because they have no other language to communicate who they are or what
they feel. When they discover the richness and the potential of language,
they often have a visceral experience of joy .
The actors first investigate what, exactly , Shakespeare is saying, line by
line. The director feeds the words one by one into the actors’ ears, and they
are instructed to say the line on the outgoing breath. At the beginning of the
process, many of these kids can barely get a line out. Progress is slow , as
each actor slowly internalizes the words. The words gain depth and
resonance as the voice changes in response to their associations. The idea is
to inspire the actors to sense their reactions to the words—and so to
discover the character . Rather than “I have to remember my lines,” theemphasis is on “What do these words mean to me ? What ef fect do I  have on
my fellow actors? And what happens to me when I hear their lines?”13
This can be a life-changing process, as I witnessed in a workshop run
by actors trained by Shakespeare & Company at the V A Medical Center in
Bath, New Y ork. Larry , a fifty-nine-year -old V ietnam veteran with twenty-
seven detox hospitalizations during the previous year , had volunteered to
play the role of Brutus in a scene from Julius Caesar . As the rehearsal
began, he mumbled and hurried through his lines; he seemed to be terrified
of what people were thinking of him.
Remember Mar ch, the ides of Mar ch r emember:
Did not gr eat Julius bleed for justice’ sake?
What villain touch’d his body , that did stab,
And not for justice?
It seemed to take hours to rehearse the speech that begins with these
lines. At first he was just standing there, shoulders slumped, repeating the
words that the director whispered in his ear: “ Remember —what do you
remember? Do you remember too much? Or not enough? Remember . What
don’ t you want to remember? What is it like to remember?” Larry’ s voice
cracked, eyes to the floor , sweat beading on his forehead.
After a short break and a sip of water , back to work. “ Justice —did you
receive justice? Did you ever bleed for justice’ s sake? What does justice
mean to you? Struck . Have you ever struck someone? Have you ever been
struck? What was it like? What do you wish you had done? Stab . Have you
ever stabbed someone? Have you ever felt stabbed in the back? Have you
stabbed someone in the back?” At this point Larry bolted from the room.
The next day he returned and we began again—Larry standing there,
perspiring, heart racing, having a million associations going through his
mind, gradually allowing himself to feel every word and learning to own
the lines that he uttered.
At the end of the program Larry started his first job in seven years, and
he was still working the last I heard, six months later . Learning to
experience and tolerate deep emotions is essential for recovery from
trauma. • • • 
In Shakespeare in the Courts, the specificity of the language that is used in
rehearsal extends to the students’ of fstage speech. Kevin Coleman notes
that their talk is riddled with the expression “I feel like . . .” He goes on: “If
you are confusing your emotional experiences with your judgments, your
work becomes vague. If you ask them, ‘How did that feel?’ they’ll
immediately say: ‘It felt good’ or ‘That felt bad.’ Both of those are
judgments. So we never say , ‘How did that feel?’ at the end of a scene,
because it invites them to go to the judgment part of their brain.”
Instead Coleman asks, “Did you notice any specific feelings that came
up for you doing that scene?” That way they learn to name emotional
experiences: “I felt angry when he said that.” “I felt scared when he looked
at me.” Becoming embodied and, for lack of a better word, “en-languaged,”
helps the actors realize that they have many dif ferent emotions. The more
they notice, the more curious they get.
When rehearsals begin, the kids have to learn to stand up straight and
walk across a stage unselfconsciously . They have to learn to speak so that
they can be heard in all parts of the theater , which in itself presents a huge
challenge. The final performance means facing the community . The kids
step out onto the stage, experiencing another level of vulnerability , danger ,
or safety , and they find out how much they can trust themselves. Gradually
the eagerness to succeed, to show that they can do it, takes over . Kevin told
me the story of a girl who played Ophelia in Hamlet. On the day of the
performance he saw her waiting backstage, ready to go on, with a
wastebasket clutched to her belly . (She explained that she was so nervous
she was scared she’d throw up). She had been a chronic runaway from her
foster homes and also from Shakespeare in the Courts. Because the program
is committed to not throwing kids out if at all possible, the police and truant
of ficers had repeatedly brought her back. There must have come a point
when she began to realize that her role was essential to the group, or
perhaps she sensed the intrinsic value of the experience for herself. At least
for that day , she was choosing not to run.
THERAPY AND THEA TERI once heard T ina Packer declare to a roomful of trauma specialists:
“Therapy and theater are intuition at work. They are the opposite of
research, where one strives to step outside of one’ s own personal
experience, even outside your patients’ experience, to test the objective
validity of assumptions. What makes therapy ef fective is deep, subjective
resonance and that deep sense of truth and veracity that lives in the body .” I
am still hoping that someday we will prove T ina wrong and combine the
rigor of scientific methods with the power of embodied intuition.
Edward, one of the Shakespeare & Company teachers, told me about an
experience he’d had as a young actor in Packer ’ s advanced training
workshop. The group had spent the morning doing exercises aimed at
getting the muscles of the torso to release, so that the breath could drop in
naturally and fully . Edward noticed that every time he rolled through one
section of his ribs, he’d feel a wave of sadness. The coach asked if he’d
ever been injured there, and he said no.
For Packer ’ s afternoon class he’d prepared a speech from Richar d II
where the king is summoned to give up his crown to the lord who has
usurped him. During the discussion afterward, he recalled that his mother
had broken her ribs when she was pregnant with him and that he’d always
associated this with his premature birth.
As he recalled:
When I told T ina this, she started asking me questions about
my first few months. I said I didn’ t remember being in an
incubator but that I remembered times later when I stopped
breathing, and being in the hospital in an oxygen tent. I
remembered being in my uncle’ s car and him driving through red
lights to get me to the emer gency room. It was like having sudden
infant death syndrome at the age of three.
T ina kept asking me questions, and I started to get really
frustrated and angry at her poking away at whatever shield I had
around that pain. Then she said, “W as it painful when the doctors
stuck all those needles in you?”
At that moment, I just started screaming. I tried to leave the
room, but two of the other actors—really big guys—held medown. They finally got me to sit in a chair , and I was trembling
and shaking. Then T ina said, “Y ou’re your mother and you’re
going to do this speech. Y ou’re your mother and you’re giving
birth to yourself. And you’re telling yourself that you’re going to
make it. Y ou’re not going to die. Y ou must convince yourself. Y ou
must convince that little newborn that you’re not going to die.”
This became my intention with Richard’ s speech. When I first
brought the speech to class, I told myself that I wanted to get the
role right, not that something welling deep inside me needed to say
these words. When finally it did, it became so clear that my baby
was like Richard; I was not ready to give up my throne. It was like
megatons of ener gy and tension just left my body . Pathways
opened up for expression that had been blocked by this baby
holding his breath and being so afraid that it was going to die.
The genius of T ina was in having me become my mother
telling me I’d be okay . It was almost like going back and changing
the story . Being reassured that someday I would feel safe enough
to express my pain made it a precious part of my life.
That night I had the first or gasm I’d ever had in the presence of
another person. And I know it’ s because I released something—
some tension in my body—that allowed me to be more in the
world.WE P I L O G U E
C H O I C E S  T O  B E  M A D E
e are on the ver ge of becoming a trauma-conscious society . Almost
every day one of my colleagues publishes another report on how
trauma disrupts the workings of mind, brain, and body . The ACE study
showed how early abuse devastates health and social functioning, while
James Heckman won a Nobel Prize for demonstrating the vast savings
produced by early intervention in the lives of children from poor and
troubled families: more high school graduations, less criminality , increased
employment, and decreased family and community violence. All over the
world I meet people who take these data seriously and who work tirelessly
to develop and apply more ef fective interventions, whether devoted
teachers, social workers, doctors, therapists, nurses, philanthropists, theater
directors, prison guards, police of ficers, or meditation coaches. If you have
come this far with me in The Body Ke e ps the Scor e , you have also become
part of this community .
Advances in neuroscience have given us a better understanding of how
trauma changes brain development, self-regulation, and the capacity to stay
focused and in tune with others. Sophisticated imaging techniques have
identified the origins of PTSD in the brain, so that we now understand why
traumatized people become disengaged, why they are bothered by sounds
and lights, and why they may blow up or withdraw in response to the
slightest provocation. W e have learned how , throughout life, experiences
change the structure and function of the brain—and even af fect the genes
we pass on to our children. Understanding many of the fundamental
processes that underlie traumatic stress opens the door to an array ofinterventions that can bring the brain areas related to self-regulation, self-
perception, and attention back online. W e know not only how to treat
trauma but also, increasingly , how to prevent it.
And yet, after attending another wake for a teenager who was killed in
a drive-by shooting in the Blue Hill A venue section of Boston or after
reading about the latest school budget cuts in impoverished cities and
towns, I find myself close to despair . In many ways we seem to be
regressing, with measures like the callous congressional elimination of food
stamps for kids whose parents are unemployed or in jail; with the stubborn
opposition to universal health care in some quarters; with psychiatry’ s
obtuse refusal to make connection between psychic suf fering and social
conditions; with the refusal to prohibit the sale or possession of weapons
whose only purpose is to kill lar ge numbers of human beings; and with our
tolerance for incarcerating a huge segment of our population, wasting their
lives as well as our resources.
Discussions of PTSD still tend to focus on recently returned soldiers,
victims of terrorist bombings, or survivors of terrible accidents. But trauma
remains a much lar ger public health issue, ar guably the greatest threat to
our national well-being. Since 2001 far more Americans have died at the
hands of their partners or other family members than in the wars in Iraq and
Afghanistan. American women are twice as likely to suf fer domestic
violence as breast cancer . The American Academy of Pediatrics estimates
that firearms kill twice as many children as cancer does. All around Boston
I see signs advertising the Jimmy Fund, which fights children’ s cancer , and
for marches to fund research on breast cancer and leukemia, but we seem
too embarrassed or discouraged to mount a massive ef fort to help children
and adults learn to deal with the fear , rage, and collapse, the predictable
consequences of having been traumatized.
When I give presentations on trauma and trauma treatment, participants
sometimes ask me to leave out the politics and confine myself to talking
about neuroscience and therapy . I wish I could separate trauma from
politics, but as long as we continue to live in denial and treat only trauma
while ignoring its origins, we are bound to fail. In today’ s world your ZIP
code, even more than your genetic code, determines whether you will lead a
safe and healthy life. People’ s income, family structure, housing,
employment, and educational opportunities af fect not only their risk ofdeveloping traumatic stress but also their access to ef fective help to address
it. Poverty , unemployment, inferior schools, social isolation, widespread
availability of guns, and substandard housing all are breeding grounds for
trauma. T rauma breeds further trauma; hurt people hurt other people.
My most profound experience with healing from collective trauma was
witnessing the work of the South African T ruth and Reconciliation
Commission, which was based on the central guiding principle of Ubuntu , a
Xhosa word that denotes sharing what you have, as in “My humanity is
inextricably bound up in yours.” Ubuntu recognizes that true healing is
impossible without recognition of our common humanity and our common
destiny .
W e are fundamentally social creatures—our brains are wired to foster
working and playing together . T rauma devastates the social-engagement
system and interferes with cooperation, nurturing, and the ability to
function as a productive member of the clan. In this book we have seen how
many mental health problems, from drug addiction to self-injurious
behavior , start of f as attempts to cope with emotions that became
unbearable because of a lack of adequate human contact and support. Y et
institutions that deal with traumatized children and adults all too often
bypass the emotional-engagement system that is the foundation of who we
are and instead focus narrowly on correcting “faulty thinking” and on
suppressing unpleasant emotions and troublesome behaviors.
People can learn to control and change their behavior , but only if they
feel safe enough to experiment with new solutions. The body keeps the
score: If trauma is encoded in heartbreaking and gut-wrenching sensations,
then our first priority is to help people move out of fight-or -flight states,
reor ganize their perception of danger , and manage relationships. Where
traumatized children are concerned, the last things we should be cutting
from school schedules are the activities that can do precisely that: chorus,
physical education, recess, and anything else that involves movement, play ,
and other forms of joyful engagement.
As we’ve seen, my own profession often compounds, rather than
alleviates, the problem. Many psychiatrists today work in assembly-line
of fices where they see patients they hardly know for fifteen minutes and
then dole out pills to relieve pain, anxiety , or depression. Their message
seems to be “Leave it to us to fix you; just be compliant and take thesedrugs and come back in three months—but be sure not to use alcohol or
(illegal) drugs to relieve your problems.” Such shortcuts in treatment make
it impossible to develop  self-care and self-leadership. One tragic example of
this orientation is the rampant prescription of painkillers, which now kill
more people each year in the United States than guns or car accidents.
Our increasing use of drugs to treat these conditions doesn’ t address the
real issues: What are these patients trying to cope with? What are their
internal or external resources? How do they calm themselves down? Do
they have caring relationships with their bodies, and what do they do to
cultivate a physical sense of power , vitality , and relaxation? Do they have
dynamic interactions with other people? Who really knows them, loves
them, and cares about them? Whom can they count on when they’re scared,
when their babies are ill, or when they are sick themselves? Are they
members of a community , and do they play vital roles in the lives of the
people around them? What specific skills do they need to focus, pay
attention, and make choices? Do they have a sense of purpose? What are
they good at? How can we help them feel in char ge of their lives?
I like to believe that once our society truly focuses on the needs of
children, all forms of social support for families—a policy that remains so
controversial in this country—will gradually come to seem not only
desirable but also doable. What dif ference would it make if all American
children had access to high-quality day care where parents could safely
leave their children as they went of f to work or school? What would our
school systems look like if all children could attend well-staf fed preschools
that cultivated cooperation, self-regulation, perseverance, and concentration
(as opposed to focusing on passing tests, which will likely happen once
children are allowed to follow their natural curiosity and desire to excel,
and are not shut down by hopelessness, fear , and hyperarousal)?
I have a family photograph of myself as a five-year -old, perched
between my older (obviously wiser) and younger (obviously more
dependent) siblings. In the picture I proudly hold up a wooden toy boat,
grinning from ear to ear: “See what a wonderful kid I am and see what an
incredible boat I have! W ouldn’ t you love to come and play with me?” All
of us, but especially children, need such confidence—confidence that others
will know , af firm, and cherish us. W ithout that we can’ t develop a sense of
agency that will enable us to assert: “This is what I believe in; this is what Istand for; this is what I will devote myself to.” As long as we feel safely
held in the hearts and minds of the people who love us, we will climb
mountains and cross deserts and stay up all night to finish projects. Children
and adults will do anything for people they trust and whose opinion they
value.
But if we feel abandoned, worthless, or invisible, nothing seems to
matter . Fear destroys curiosity and playfulness. In order to have a healthy
society we must raise children who can safely play and learn. There can be
no growth without curiosity and no adaptability without being able to
explore, through trial and error , who you are and what matters to you.
Currently more than 50 percent of the children served by Head Start have
had three or more adverse childhood experiences like those included in the
ACE study: incarcerated family members, depression, violence, abuse, or
drug use in the home, or periods of homelessness.
People who feel safe and meaningfully connected with others have
little reason to squander their lives doing drugs or staring numbly at
television; they don’ t feel compelled to stuf f themselves with carbohydrates
or assault their fellow human beings. However , if nothing they do seems to
make a dif ference, they feel trapped and become susceptible to the lure of
pills, gang leaders, extremist religions, or violent political movements—
anybody and anything that promises relief. As the ACE study has shown,
child abuse and neglect is the single most preventable cause of mental
illness, the single most common cause of drug and alcohol abuse,  and a
significant contributor to leading causes of death such as diabetes, heart
disease, cancer , stroke, and suicide.
My colleagues and I focus much of our work where trauma has its
greatest impact: on children and adolescents. Since we came together to
establish the National Child T raumatic Stress Network in 2001, it has
grown into a collaborative network of more than 150 centers nationwide,
each of which has created programs in schools, juvenile justice systems,
child welfare agencies , homeless shelters, military facilities, and residential
group homes.
The T rauma Center is one of NCTSN’ s T reatment Development and
Evaluation sites. My colleagues Joe Spinazzola, Mar garet Blaustein, and I
have developed comprehensive programs for children and adolescents that
we, with the help of trauma-savvy colleagues in Hartford, Chicago,Houston, San Francisco, Anchorage, Los Angeles, and New Y ork, are now
implementing. Our team selects a particular area of the country to work in
every two years, relying on local contacts to identify or ganizations that are
ener getic, open, and well respected; these will eventually serve as new
nodes for treatment dissemination. For example, I collaborated for one two-
year period with colleagues in Missoula, Montana, to help develop a
culturally sensitive trauma program on Blackfoot Indian reservations.
The greatest hope for traumatized, abused, and neglected children is to
receive a good education in schools where they are seen and known, where
they learn to regulate themselves, and where they can develop a sense of
agency . At their best, schools can function as islands of safety in a chaotic
world. They can teach children how their bodies and brains work and how
they can understand and deal with their emotions. Schools can play a
significant role in instilling the resilience necessary to deal with the traumas
of neighborhoods or families. If parents are forced to work two jobs to eke
out a living, or if they are too impaired, overwhelmed, or depressed to be
attuned to the needs of their kids, schools by default have to be the places
where children are taught self-leadership and an internal locus of control.
When our team arrives at a school, the teachers’ initial response is
often some version of “If I’d wanted to be a social worker , I would have
gone to social work school. But I came here to be a teacher .” Many of them
have already learned the hard way , however , that they cannot teach if they
have a classroom filled with students whose alarm bells are constantly
going of f. Even the most committed teachers and school systems often
come to feel frustrated and inef fective because so many of their kids are too
traumatized to learn. Focusing only on improving test scores won’ t make
any dif ference if teachers can’ t ef fectively address the behavior problems of
these students. The good news is that the basic principles of trauma-focused
interventions can be translated into practical day-to-day routines and
approaches that can transform the entire culture of a school.
Most teachers we work with are intrigued to learn that abused and
neglected students are likely to interpret any deviation from routine as
danger and that their extreme reactions usually are expressions of traumatic
stress. Children who defy the rules are unlikely to be brought to reason by
verbal reprimands or even suspension—a practice that has become
epidemic in American schools. T eachers’ perspectives begin to changewhen they realize that these kids’ disturbing behaviors started out as
frustrated attempts to communicate distress and as misguided attempts to
survive.
More than anything else, being able to feel safe with other people
defines mental health; safe connections are fundamental to meaningful and
satisfying lives. The critical challenge in a classroom setting is to foster
reciprocity: truly hearing and being heard; really seeing and being seen by
other people. W e try to teach everyone in a school community—of fice staf f,
principals, bus drivers, teachers, and cafeteria workers—to recognize and
understand the ef fects of trauma on children and to focus on the importance
of fostering safety , predictability , and being known and seen. W e make
certain that the children are greeted by name every morning and that
teachers make face-to-face contact with each and every one of them. Just as
in our workshops, group work, and theater programs, we always start the
day with check-ins: taking the time to share what’ s on everybody’ s mind.
Many of the children we work with have never been able to
communicate successfully with language, as they are accustomed to adults
who yell, command, sulk, or put earbuds in their ears. One of our first steps
is to help their teachers model new ways of talking about feelings, stating
expectations, and asking for help. Instead of yelling, “Stop!” when a child is
throwing a tantrum or making her sit alone in the corner , teachers are
encouraged to notice and name the child’ s experience, as in “I can see how
upset you are”; to give her choices, as in “W ould you like to go to the safe
spot or sit on my lap?”; and to help her find words to describe her feelings
and begin to find her voice, as in: “What will happen when you get home
after class?” It may take many months for a child to know when it is safe to
speak the truth (because it will never be universally safe), but for children,
as for adults, identifying the truth of an experience is essential to healing
from trauma.
It is standard practice in many schools to punish children for tantrums,
spacing out, or aggressive outbursts—all of which are often symptoms of
traumatic stress. When that happens, the school, instead of of fering a safe
haven, becomes yet another traumatic trigger . Angry confrontations and
punishment can at best temporarily halt unacceptable behaviors, but since
the underlying alarm system and stress hormones are not laid to rest, they
are certain to erupt again at the next provocation.In such situations the first step is acknowledging that a child is upset;
then the teacher should calm him, then explore the cause and discuss
possible solutions. For example, when a first-grader melts down, hitting his
teacher and throwing objects around, we encourage his teacher to set clear
limits while gently talking to him: “ W ould you like to wrap that blanket
around you to help you calm down?” (The kid is likely to scream, “No!” but
then curl up under the blanket and settle down.) Predictability and clarity of
expectations are critical; consistency is essential. Children from chaotic
backgrounds often have no idea how people can ef fectively work together ,
and inconsistency only promotes further confusion. T rauma-sensitive
teachers soon realize that calling a parent about an obstreperous kid is likely
to result in a beating and further traumatization.
Our goal in all these ef forts is to translate brain science into everyday
practice. For example, calming down enough to take char ge of ourselves
requires activating the brain areas that notice our inner sensations, the self-
observing watchtower discussed in chapter 4. So a teacher might say: “Shall
we take some deep breaths or use the breathing star?” (This is a colorful
breathing aid made out of file folders.) Another option might be having the
child sit in a corner wrapped in a heavy blanket while listening to some
soothing music through headphones. Safe areas can help kids calm down by
providing stimulating sensory awareness: the texture of burlap or velvet;
shoe boxes filled with soft brushes and flexible toys. When the child is
ready to talk again, he is encouraged to tell someone what is going on
before he rejoins the group.
Kids as young as three can blow soap bubbles and learn that when they
slow down their breathing to six breaths per minute and focus on the out
breath as it flows over their upper lip, they will feel more calm and focused.
Our team of yoga teachers works with children nearing adolescence
specifically to help them “befriend” their bodies and deal with disruptive
physical sensations. W e know that one of the prime reasons for habitual
drug use in teens is that they cannot stand the physical sensations that signal
fear , rage, and helplessness.
Self-regulation can be taught to many kids who cycle between frantic
activity and immobility . In addition to reading, writing, and arithmetic, all
kids need to learn self-awareness, self-regulation, and communication as
part of their core curriculum. Just as we teach history  and geography , weneed to teach children how their brains and bodies work. For adults and
children alike, being in control of ourselves requires becoming familiar with
our inner world and accurately identifying what scares, upsets, or delights
us.
Emotional intelligence starts with labeling your own feelings and
attuning to the emotions of the people around you.  W e begin very simply:
with mirrors. Looking into a mirror helps kids to be aware of what they
look like when they are sad, angry , bored, or disappointed. Then we ask
them, “How do you feel when you see a face like that?” W e teach them how
their brains are built, what emotions are for , and where they are registered
in their bodies, and how they can communicate their feelings to the people
around them.  They learn that their facial muscles give clues about what they
are feeling and then  experiment  with how their facial expressions af fect
other people.
W e also strengthen the brain’ s watchtower by teaching them to
recognize and name their physical sensations. For example, when their
chest tightens, that probably means that they are nervous; their breathing
becomes shallow and they feel uptight. What does anger feel like, and what
can they do to change that sensation in their body? What happens if they
take a deep breath or take time out to jump rope or hit a punching bag?
Does tapping acupressure points help? W e try to provide children, teachers,
and other care providers with a toolbox of ways to take char ge of their
emotional reactions.
T o promote reciprocity , we use other mirroring exercises, which are the
foundation of safe interpersonal communication. Kids practice imitating
one another ’ s facial expressions. They proceed to imitating gestures and
sounds and then get up and move in sync. T o play well, they have to pay
attention to really seeing and hearing one another . Games like Simon Says
lead to  lots of sniggering and giggling—signs of safety and relaxation.
When teenagers balk at these “stupid games,” we nod understandingly and
enlist their cooperation by asking them to demonstrate games to the little
kids, who “need their help.”
T eachers and leaders learn that an activity as simple as trying to keep a
beach ball in the air as long as possible helps groups become more focused,
cohesive, and fun. These are inexpensive interventions. For older children
some schools have installed workstations costing less than two hundreddollars where students can play computer games to help them focus and to
improve their heart rate variability (HR V) (discussed in chapter 16), just as
we do in our own clinic.
Children and adults alike need to experience how rewarding it is to
work at the edge of their abilities. Resilience is the product of agency:
knowing that what you do can make a dif ference .  Many of us remember
what playing team sports, singing in the school choir , or playing in the
marching band meant to us, especially if we had coaches or directors who
believed in us, pushed us to excel, and taught us we could be better than we
thought was possible. The children we reach need this experience.
Athletics, playing music, dancing, and theatrical performances all
promote agency and community . They also engage kids in novel challenges
and unaccustomed roles. In a devastated postindustrial New England town,
my friends Carolyn and Eli Newber ger are teaching El Sistema, an
orchestral music program that originated in V enezuela. Several of my
students run an after -school program in Brazilian capoeira  in a high-crime
area of Boston, and my colleagues at the T rauma Center continue the
T rauma Drama program.  Last year I spent three weeks helping two boys
prepare a scene from Julius Caesar . An ef feminate, shy boy was playing
Brutus and had to summon up his full force to put down Cassius, played by
the class bully , who had to be coached to play a corrupt general begging for
mercy .  The scene came to life only after the bully talked about his father ’ s
violence and his own vow never to show weakness to anyone. (Most bullies
have themselves been bullied, and they despise kids who remind them of
their own vulnerability .) Brutus’ s powerful voice, on the other hand,
emer ged after he realized that he’d made himself invisible to deal with his
own family violence.
These intense communal ef forts force kids to collaborate, compromise,
and stay focused on the task at hand. T ensions often run high, but the kids
stick with it because they want to earn the respect of their coaches or
directors and don’ t want to let down the team—all feelings that are opposite
to the vulnerability of being subjected to arbitrary abuse, the invisibility of
neglect, and the godforsaken isolation of trauma.
Our NCTSN programs are working: Kids become less anxious and
emotionally reactive and are less aggressive or withdrawn; they get along
better and their school performance improves; their attention deficit,hyperactivity , and “oppositional defiant” problems decrease; and parents
report that their children are sleeping better . T errible things still happen to
them and around them, but they are now able to talk about these events;
they have built up the trust and resources to seek the help they need.
Interventions are successful if they draw on our natural wellsprings of
cooperation and on our inborn responses to safety , reciprocity , and
imagination.
T rauma constantly confronts us with our fragility and with man’ s
inhumanity to man but also with our extraordinary resilience. I have been
able to do this work for so long because it drew me to explore our sources
of joy , creativity , meaning, and connection—all the things that make life
worth living. I can’ t begin to imagine how I would have coped with what
many of my patients have endured, and I see their symptoms as part of their
strength—the ways they learned to survive. And despite all their suf fering
many have gone on to become loving partners and parents, exemplary
teachers, nurses, scientists, and artists.
Most great instigators of social change have intimate personal
knowledge of trauma.  Oprah W infrey comes to mind, as do Maya Angelou,
Nelson Mandela, and Elie W iesel. Read the life history of any visionary ,
and you will find insights and passions that came from having dealt with
devastation.
The same is true of societies. Many of our most profound advances
grew out of experiencing trauma: the abolition of slavery from the Civil
W ar , Social Security in response to the Great Depression, and the GI Bill,
which produced our once vast and prosperous middle class, from W orld
W ar II. T rauma is now our most ur gent public health issue, and we have the
knowledge necessary to respond ef fectively . The choice is ours to act on
what we know .A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S
This book is the fruit of thirty years of trying to understand how people deal
with, survive, and heal from traumatic experiences. Thirty years of clinical
work with traumatized men, women and children; innumerable discussions
with colleagues and students, and participation in the evolving science
about how mind, brain, and body deal with, and recover from,
overwhelming experiences.
Let me start with the people who helped me or ganize, and eventually
publish, this book. T oni Burbank, my editor , with whom I communicated
many times each week over a two-year period about the scope,
or ganization, and specific contents of the book. T oni truly understood what
this book is about, and that understanding has been critical in defining its
form and substance. My agent, Brettne Bloom, understood the importance
of this work, found a home for it with V iking, and provided critical support
at critical moments. Rick Kot, my editor at V iking, supplied invaluable
feedback and editorial guidance.
My colleagues and students at the T rauma Center have provided the
feeding ground, laboratory , and support system for this work. They also
have been constant reminders of the sober reality of our work for these
three decades. I cannot name them all, but Joseph Spinazzola, Mar garet
Blaustein, Roslin Moore, Richard Jacobs, Liz W arner , W endy D’Andrea,
Jim Hopper , Fran Grossman, Alex Cook, Marla Zucker , Kevin Becker ,
David Emerson, Steve Gross, Dana Moore, Robert Macy , Liz Rice-Smith,
Patty Levin, Nina Murray , Mark Gapen, Carrie Pekor , Debbie Korn, and
Betta de Boer van der Kolk all have been critical collaborators. And of
course Andy Pond and Susan W ayne of the Justice Resource Institute.My most important companions and guides in understanding and
researching traumatic stress have been Alexander McFarlane, Onno van der
Hart, Ruth Lanius and Paul Frewen, Rachel Y ehuda, Stephen Por ges, Glenn
Saxe, Jaak Panksepp, Janet Osterman, Julian Ford, Brad Stolback, Frank
Putnam, Bruce Perry , Judith Herman, Robert Pynoos, Berthold Gersons,
Ellert Nijenhuis, Annette Streeck-Fisher , Marylene Cloitre, Dan Siegel, Eli
Newber ger , V incent Felitti, Robert Anda, and Martin T eicher; as well as my
colleagues who taught me about attachment: Edward T ronick, Karlen
L yons-Ruth, and Beatrice Beebe.
Peter Levine, Pat Ogden, and Al Pesso read my paper on the
importance of the body in traumatic stress back in 1994 and then of fered to
teach me about the body . I am still learning from them, and that learning
has since then been expanded by yoga and meditation teachers Stephen
Cope, Jon Kabat-Zinn, and Jack Kornfield.
Sebern Fisher first taught me about neurofeedback. Ed Hamlin and
Larry Hirshber g later expanded that understanding. Richard Schwartz
taught me internal family systems (IFS) therapy and assisted in helping to
write the chapter on IFS. Kippy Dewey and Cissa Campion introduced me
to theater , T ina Packer tried to teach me how to do it, and Andrew
Borthwick- Leslie provided critical details.
Adam Cummings, Amy Sullivan, and Susan Miller provided
indispensible support, without which many projects in this book could
never have been accomplished.
Licia Sky created the environment that allowed me to concentrate on
writing this book; she provided invaluable feedback on each one of the
chapters; she donated her artistic gifts to many illustrations; and she
contributed to sections on body awareness and clinical case material. My
trusty secretary , Angela Lin, took care of multiple crises and kept the ship
running at full speed. Ed and Edith Schonber g often provided a shelter from
the storm; Barry and Lorrie Goldensohn served as literary critics and
inspiration; and my children, Hana and Nicholas, showed me that every
new generation lives in a world that is radically dif ferent from the previous
one, and that each life is unique—a creative act by its owner that defies
explanation by genetics, environment, or culture alone.
Finally , my patients, to whom I dedicate this book—I wish I could
mention you all by name—who taught me almost everything I know—because you were my true textbook—and the af firmation of the life force,
which drives us human beings to create a meaningful life, regardless of the
obstacles we encounter .A P P E N D I X
C O N S E N S U S  P R O P O S E D  C R I T E R I A
F O R  D E V E L O P M E N T A L  T R A U M A
D I S O R D E R
The goal of introducing the diagnosis of Developmental T rauma Disorder is
to capture the reality of the clinical presentations of children and
adolescents exposed to chronic interpersonal trauma and thereby guide
clinicians to develop and utilize ef fective interventions and for researchers
to study the neurobiology and transmission of chronic interpersonal
violence. Whether or not they exhibit symptoms of PTSD, children who
have developed in the context of ongoing danger , maltreatment, and
inadequate caregiving systems are ill-served by the current diagnostic
system, as it frequently leads to no diagnosis, multiple unrelated diagnoses,
an emphasis on behavioral control without recognition of interpersonal
trauma and lack of safety in the etiology of symptoms, and a lack of
attention to ameliorating the developmental disruptions that underlie the
symptoms.
The Consensus Proposed Criteria for Developmental T rauma Disorder
were devised and put forward in February 2009 by a National Child
T raumatic Stress Network (NCTSN)-af filiated T ask Force led by Bessel A.
van der Kolk, MD and Robert S. Pynoos, MD, with the participation of
Dante Cicchetti, PhD, Marylene Cloitre, PhD, W endy D’Andrea, PhD,
Julian D. Ford, PhD, Alicia F . Lieberman, PhD, Frank W . Putnam, MD,
Glenn Saxe, MD, Joseph Spinazzola, PhD, Bradley C. Stolbach, PhD, and
Martin T eicher , MD, PhD. The consensus proposed criteria are based onextensive review of empirical literature, expert clinical wisdom, surveys of
NCTSN clinicians, and preliminary analysis of data from thousands of
children in numerous clinical and child service system settings, including
NCTSN treatment centers, state child welfare systems, inpatient psychiatric
settings, and juvenile detention centers. Because their validity , prevalence,
symptom thresholds, or clinical utility have yet to be examined through
prospective data collection or analysis, these proposed criteria should not be
viewed as a formal diagnostic category to be incorporated into the DSM as
written here. Rather , they are intended to describe the most clinically
significant symptoms exhibited by many children and adolescents following
complex trauma. These proposed criteria have guided the Developmental
T rauma Disorder field trials that began in 2009 and continue to this day .
CONSENSUS PROPOSED CRITERIA FOR DEVELOPMENT AL TRAUMA DISORDER
A. Exposure. The child or adolescent has experienced or witnessed
multiple or prolonged adverse events over a period of at least one
year beginning in childhood or early adolescence, including:
A. 1. Direct experience or witnessing of repeated and severe
episodes of interpersonal violence; and
A. 2. Significant disruptions of protective caregiving as the result of
repeated changes in primary caregiver; repeated separation from
the primary caregiver; or exposure to severe and persistent
emotional abuse
B. Af fective and Physiological Dysregulation. The child exhibits
impaired normative developmental competencies related to arousal
regulation, including at least two of the following:
B. 1. Inability to modulate, tolerate, or recover from extreme af fect
states (e.g., fear , anger , shame), including prolonged and extreme
tantrums, or immobilization
B. 2. Disturbances in regulation in bodily functions (e.g. persistent
disturbances in sleeping, eating, and elimination; over -reactivity
or under -reactivity to touch and sounds; disor ganization during
routine transitions)B. 3. Diminished awareness/dissociation of sensations, emotions
and bodily states
B. 4. Impaired capacity to describe emotions or bodily states
C. Attentional and Behavioral Dysregulation: The child exhibits
impaired normative developmental competencies related to sustained
attention, learning, or coping with stress, including at least three of
the following:
C. 1. Preoccupation with threat, or impaired capacity to perceive
threat, including misreading of safety and danger cues
C. 2. Impaired capacity for self-protection, including extreme risk-
taking or thrill-seeking
C. 3. Maladaptive attempts at self-soothing (e.g., rocking and other
rhythmical movements, compulsive masturbation)
C. 4. Habitual (intentional or automatic) or reactive self-harm
C. 5. Inability to initiate or sustain goal-directed behavior
D. Self and Relational Dysregulation. The child exhibits impaired
normative developmental competencies in their sense of personal
identity and involvement in relationships, including at least three of
the following:
D. 1. Intense preoccupation with safety of the caregiver or other
loved ones (including precocious caregiving) or dif ficulty
tolerating reunion with them after separation
D. 2. Persistent negative sense of self, including self-loathing,
helplessness, worthlessness, inef fectiveness, or defectiveness
D. 3. Extreme and persistent distrust, defiance or lack of reciprocal
behavior in close relationships with adults or peers
D. 4. Reactive physical or verbal aggression toward peers,
caregivers, or other adults
D. 5. Inappropriate (excessive or promiscuous) attempts to get
intimate contact (including but not limited to sexual or physical
intimacy) or excessive reliance on peers or adults for safety and
reassuranceD. 6. Impaired capacity to regulate empathic arousal as evidenced
by lack of empathy for , or intolerance of, expressions of distress
of others, or excessive responsiveness to the distress of others
E. Posttraumatic Spectrum Symptoms. The child exhibits at least one
symptom in at least two of the three PTSD symptom clusters B, C, &
D.
F . Duration of disturbance (symptoms in DTD Criteria B, C, D, and E) at
least 6 months.
G. Functional Impairment. The disturbance causes clinically significant
distress or impairment in at least two of the following areas of
functioning:
Scholastic
Familial
Peer Group
Legal
Health
V ocational (for youth involved in, seeking or referred for
employment, volunteer work or job training)
B. A. van der Kolk, “Developmental T rauma Disorder: T oward A Rational Diagnosis For
ChildrenW ith Complex T rauma Histories,” Psychiatric Annals, 35, no. 5 (2005): 401-408.R E S O U R C E S
GENERAL INFORMA TION ABOUT TRAUMA AND ITS TREA TMENT
The T rauma Center at JRI. This is the website of the T rauma
Center of which I am the medical director , which has numerous
resources for special populations, various treatment approaches,
lectures and courses: www .traumacenter .or g.
David Baldwin’ s T rauma Information Pages provide
information for clinicians and researchers in the traumatic-stress
field: http://www .trauma -pages.com/.
National Child T raumatic Stress Network (NCTSN ) . Ef fective
treatments for youth, trauma training, and education measures;
reviews of measures examining trauma for parents, educators,
judges, child welfare agencies, military personnel, and
therapists: http://www .nctsnet.or g/.
American Psychological Association. Resource guide for
traumatized people and their loved ones:
http://www .apa.or g/topics/trauma/.
A verse Childhood Experiences. Several websites are devoted to
the ACE study and its consequences:
http://acestoohigh.com/got-your -ace-score/;
http://www .cdc.gov/violenceprevention/acesstudy/; http://aces
tudy .or g/.
Gift from W ithin PTSD Resources for Survivors and
Caregivers: giftfromwithin.or g.
There & Back Again is a nonprofit or ganization that supports
the well-being of service-members. Its mission is to providereintegration support services to combat veterans of all
conflicts: http://thereandbackagain.or g/.
HelpPRO Therapist Finder . Comprehensive listings of local
therapists specializing in trauma and other concerns, serving
specific age groups, accepting payment options and more:
http://www .helppro.com/.
Sidran Foundation includes traumatic memories and general
information about dealing with trauma: www .sidran.or g.
T raumatology . Green Cross Academy of T raumatology
electronic journal, edited by Charles Figley:
www .greencross.or g/.
PILOTS database at Dartmouth is a searchable database of the
world’ s literature on post-traumatic stress disorder , produced by
the National Center for PTSD:
http://search.proquest.com/pilots/?accountid=28179.
GOVERNMENT RESOURCES
National Center for PTSD includes links to the PTSD Resear ch
Quarterly  and National Center divisions, including behavioral
science division, clinical neuroscience division, and women’ s
health sciences division: http://www .ptsd.va.gov/.
Of fice for V ictims of Crime in the Department of Justice.
Provides a variety of resources for victims of crime in the
United States and internationally , including the National
Directory of V ictim Assistance Funding Opportunities which
lists, by state and territory , the contact names, mailing addresses,
telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses for the federal grant
programs that provide assistance to crime victims:
http://ojp.gov/ovc/.
National Institutes of Mental Health:
http://www .nimh.nih.gov/health/topics/post-traumatic-stress-
disorder -ptsd/index.shtml.
WEBSITES SPECIFICALL Y DEALING WITH TRAUMA AND MEMOR YJim Hopper .com. Info on the stages of recovery , recovered
memories, and comprehensive literature review on remembering
trauma.
The Recovered Memory Project. Archive compiled by Ross
Cheit at Brown University:
http://www .brown.edu/academics/taubman-center/.
MEDICA TIONS
About Medications for Combat PTSD. Jonathan Shay , MD,
PhD, staf f psychiatrist, Boston V A Outpatient Clinic:
http://www .dr -bob.or g/tips/ptsd.html. webMD
http://www .webmd.com/drugs/condition=1020-
post+traumatic+stress+disorderaspx?
diseaseid=10200diseasename=post+traumatic+stress+disorder
PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZA TIONS FOCUSED ON GENERAL TRAUMA RESEARCH
AND DISSEMINA TION
International Society for T raumatic Stress Studies:
www .istss.com.
European Society for T raumatic Stress Studies: www .estss.or g.
International Society for the Study of T rauma and Dissociation
(ISSTD): http://www .isst-d.or g/.
PROFESSIONAL ORGANIZA TIONS DEALING WITH P AR TICULAR TREA TMENT
METHODS
The EMDR International Association (EMDRIA):
http://www .emdria.or g/.
Sensorimotor Institute (founded by Pat Ogden):
http://www .sensorimotorpsychotherapy .or g/home/index.html.
Somatic experiencing (founded by Peter Levine):
http://www .traumahealing.com/somatic-
experiencing/index.html.
Internal family systems therapy: http://www .selfleadership.or g/.
Pesso Boyden system psychomotor therapy: PBSP .com.THEA TER PROGRAMS (A SAMPLE OF PROGRAMS FOR TRAUMA TIZED YOUTH)
Urban Improv uses improvisational theater workshops to teach
violence prevention, conflict resolution, and decision making:
http://www .urbanimprov .or g/.
The Possibility Project. Based in NYC: http://the-possibility-
project.or g/.
Shakespeare in the Courts:
http://www .shakespeare.or g/education/for -youth/shakespeare-
courts/.
YOGA AND MINDFULNESS
http://givebackyoga.or g/.
http://www .kripalu.or g/.
http://www .mindandlife.or g/.F U R T H E R  R E A D I N G
DEALING WITH TRAUMA TIZED CHILDREN
Blaustein, Mar garet, and Kristine Kinnibur gh. T r eating
T raumatic Str ess in Childr en and Adolescents: How to Foster
Resilience thr ough Attachment, Self-Regulation, and
Competency . New Y ork: Guilford, 2012..
Hughes, Daniel. Building the Bonds of Attachment.  New Y ork:
Jason Aronson, 2006.
Perry , Bruce, and Maia Szalavitz. The Boy Who W as Raised as a
Dog: And Other Stories fr om a Child Psychiatrist’ s Notebook .
New Y ork: Basic Books, 2006.
T err , Lenore. T oo Scar ed to Cry: Psychic T rauma in Childhood .
Basic Books, 2008.
T err , Lenore C. W orking with Childr en to Heal Interpersonal
T rauma: The Power of Play .  Ed., Eliana Gil. New Y ork:
Guilford Press, 201 1.
Saxe, Glenn, Heidi Ellis, and Julie Kaplow . Collaborative
T r eatment of T raumatized Childr en and T eens: The T rauma
Systems Therapy Appr oach . New Y ork: Guilford Press, 2006.
Lieberman, Alicia, and Patricia van Horn. Psychotherapy with
Infants and Y oung Childr en: Repairing the Effects of Str ess and
T rauma on Early Attachment . New Y ork: Guilford Press, 201 1.
PSYCHOTHERAPY
Siegel, Daniel J. Mindsight: The New Science of Personal
T ransformation.  New Y ork: Norton, 2010.Fosha D., M. Solomon, and D. J. Siegel. The Healing Power of
Emotion: Affective Neur oscience, Development and Clinical
Practice  (Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology). New
Y ork: Norton, 2009.
Siegel, D., and M. Solomon: Healing T rauma: Attachment,
Mind, Body and Brain (Norton Series on Interpersonal
Neurobiology). New Y ork: Norton, 2003.
Courtois, Christine, and Julian Ford. T r eating Complex
T raumatic Str ess Disor ders (Adults): Scientific Foundations and
Therapeutic Models.  New Y ork: Guilford, 2013.
Herman, Judith. T rauma and Recovery: The Aftermath of
V iolence—fr om Domestic Abuse to Political T err or . New Y ork:
Basic Books, 1992.
NEUROSCIENCE OF TRAUMA
Panksepp, Jaak, and Lucy Biven. The Ar chaeology of Mind:
Neur oevolutionary Origins of Human Emotions  (Norton Series
on Interpersonal Neurobiology). New Y ork: Norton, 2012.
Davidson, Richard, and Sharon Begley . The Emotional Life of
Y our Brain: How Its Unique Patterns Affect the W ay Y ou Think,
Feel, and Live—and How Y ou Can Change Them . New Y ork:
Hachette, 2012.
Por ges, Stephen. The Polyvagal Theory: Neur ophysiological
Foundations of Emotions, Attachment, Communication, and
Self-r egulation  (Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology).
New Y ork: Norton, 201 1.
Fogel, Alan. Body Sense: The Science and Practice of Embodied
Self-A war eness (Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology).
New Y ork: Norton, 2009.
Shore, Allan N. Affect Regulation and the Origin of the Self:
The Neur obiology of Emotional Development . New Y ork:
Psychology Press, 1994.
Damasio, Antonio R. The Feeling of What Happens: Body and
Emotion in the Making of Consciousness.  Houghton Mif flinHarcourt, 2000.
BODY -ORIENTED APPROACHES
Cozzolino, Louis. The Neur oscience of Psychotherapy: Healing
the Social Brain, second edition  (Norton Series on Interpersonal
Neurobiology). New Y ork: Norton, 2010.
Ogden, Pat, and Kekuni Minton. T rauma and the Body: A
Sensorimotor Appr oach to Psychotherapy (Norton Series on
Interpersonal Neurobiology). New Y ork: Norton, 2008.
Levine, Peter A. In an Unspoken V oice: How the Body Releases
T rauma and Restor es Goodness. Berkeley: North Atlantic, 2010.
Levine, Peter A., and Ann Frederic. W aking the T iger: Healing
T rauma.  Berkeley: North Atlantic, 2012
Curran, Linda. 101 T rauma-Informed Interventions: Activities,
Exer cises and Assignments to Move the Client and Therapy
Forwar d.  PESI, 2013.
EMDR
Parnell, Laura. Attachment-Focused EMDR: Healing Relational
T rauma.  New Y ork: Norton, 2013.
Shapiro, Francine. Getting Past Y our Past: T ake Contr ol of Y our
Life with Self-Help T echniques fr om EMDR Therapy . Emmaus,
P A:  Rodale, 2012.
Shapiro, Francine, and Mar got Silk Forrest. EMDR: The
Br eakthr ough “Eye Movement” Therapy for Over coming
Anxiety , Str ess, and T rauma.  New Y ork: Basic Books, 2004.
WORKING WITH DISSOCIA TION
Schwartz, Richard C. Internal Family Systems Therapy (The
Guilford Family Therapy Series). New Y ork: Guilford, 1997.
O. van der Hart, E. R. Nijenhuis, and F . Steele. The Haunted
Self: Structural Dissociation and the T r eatment of Chr onic
T raumatization.  New Y ork: Norton, 2006.COUPLES
Gottman, John. The Science of T rust: Emotional Attunement for
Couples.  New Y ork: Norton, 201 1.
YOGA
Emerson, David, and Elizabeth Hopper . Over coming T rauma
thr ough Y oga: Reclaiming Y our Body .  Berkeley: North Atlantic,
2012.
Cope, Stephen. Y oga and the Quest for the T rue Self . New Y ork:
Bantam Books, 1999.
NEUROFEEDBACK
Fisher , Sebern. Neur ofeedback in the T r eatment of
Developmental T rauma: Calming the Fear -Driven Brain . New
Y ork: Norton, 2014.
Demos, John N. Getting Started with Neur ofeedback . New
Y ork: Norton, 2005.
Evans, James R. Handbook of Neur ofeedback: Dynamics and
Clinical Applications. CRC Press, 2013.
PHYSICAL EFFECTS OF TRAUMA
Mate, Gabor When the Body Says No: Understanding the Str ess-
Disease Connection.  New Y ork: Random House, 201 1.
Sapolsky , Robert. Why Zebras Don’ t Get Ulcers: The Acclaimed
Guide to Str ess, Str ess-Related Diseases, and Coping . New
Y ork: Macmillan 2004.
MEDIT A TION AND MINDFULNESS
Zinn, Jon Kabat and Thich Nat Hanh. Full Catastr ophe Living :
Using the W isdom of Y our Body and Mind to Face Str ess, Pain,
and Illness , revised edition. New Y ork: Random House, 2009.Kornfield , Jack. A Path with Heart: A Guide Thr ough The Perils
and Pr omises of Spiritual Life. New Y ork:  Random House,
2009.
Goldstein, Joseph, and Jack Kornfield. Seeking the Heart of
W isdom: The Path of Insight Meditation.  Shambhala
Publications, 2001.
PSYCHOMOT OR THERAPY
Pesso, Albert, and John S. Crandell. Moving Psychotherapy:
Theory and Application of Pesso System-Psychomotor Therapy .
Brookline Books, 1991.
Pesso, Albert. Experience In Action: A Psychomotor
Psychology , New Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 1969.N O T E S
PROLOGUE
1 . V . Felitti, et al. “Relationship of Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to Many of the
Leading Causes of Death in Adults: The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study .”
American Journal of Pr eventive Medicine  14, no. 4 (1998): 245–58.
CHAPTER 1: LESSONS FROM VIETNAM VETERANS
1 . A. Kardiner , The T raumatic Neur oses of W ar  (New Y ork: P . Hoeber , 1941). Later I discovered
that numerous textbooks on war trauma were published around both the First and Second W orld
W ars, but as Abram Kardiner wrote in 1947: “The subject of neurotic disturbances consequent
upon war has, in the past 25 years, been submitted to a good deal of capriciousness in public
interest and psychiatric whims. The public does not sustain its interest, which was very great
after W orld W ar I, and neither does psychiatry . Hence these conditions are not subject to
continuous study .”
2 . Op cit, p. 7.
3 . B. A. van der Kolk, “Adolescent V ulnerability to Post T raumatic Stress Disorder ,” Psychiatry
48 (1985): 365–70.
4 . S. A. Haley , “When the Patient Reports Atrocities: Specific T reatment Considerations of the
V ietnam V eteran,” Ar chives of General Psychiatry  30 (1974): 191–96.
5 . E. Hartmann, B. A. van der Kolk, and M. Olfield, “A Preliminary Study of the Personality of
the Nightmare Suf ferer ,” American Journal of Psychiatry  138 (1981): 794–97; B. A. van der
Kolk, et al., “Nightmares and T rauma: Life-long and T raumatic Nightmares in V eterans,”
American Journal of Psychiatry  141 (1984): 187–90.
6 . B. A. van der Kolk and C. Ducey , “The Psychological Processing of T raumatic Experience:
Rorschach Patterns in PTSD,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  2 (1989): 259–74.
7 . Unlike normal memories, traumatic memories are more like fragments of sensations, emotions,
reactions, and images, that keep getting reexperienced in the present. The studies of Holocaust
memories at Y ale by Dori Laub and Nanette C. Auerhahn, as well as Lawrence L. Langer ’ s
book Holocaust T estimonies: The Ruins of Memory , and, most of all, Pierre Janet’ s 1889, 1893,
and 1905 descriptions of the nature of traumatic memories helped us or ganize what we saw .
That work will be discussed in the memory chapter .
8 . D. J. Henderson, “Incest,” in Compr ehensive T extbook of Psychiatry , eds. A. M. Freedman and
H. I. Kaplan, 2nd ed. (Baltimore: W illiams & W ilkins, 1974), 1536.
9 . Ibid.10 . K. H. Seal, et al., “Bringing the W ar Back Home: Mental Health Disorders Among 103,788
U.S. V eterans Returning from Iraq and Afghanistan Seen at Department of V eterans Af fairs
Facilities,” Ar chives of Internal Medicine  167, no. 5 (2007): 476–82; C. W . Hoge, J. L.
Auchterlonie, and C. S. Milliken, “Mental Health Problems, Use of Mental Health Services, and
Attrition from Military Service After Returning from Deployment to Iraq or Afghanistan,”
Journal of the American Medical Association 295, no. 9 ( 2006): 1023–32.
1 1 . D. G. Kilpatrick and B. E. Saunders, Pr evalence and Consequences of Child V ictimization:
Results fr om the National Survey of Adolescents: Final Report  (Charleston, SC: National Crime
V ictims Research and T reatment Center , Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
Medical University of South Carolina 1997).
12 . U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Administration on Children, Y outh and
Families, Child Maltr eatment 2007 , 2009. See also U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, Administration for Children and Families, Administration on Children, Y outh and
Families, Children’ s Bureau, Child Maltr eatment 2010 , 201 1.
CHAPTER 2: REV OLUTIONS IN UNDERST ANDING MIND AND BRAIN
1 . G. Ross Baker , et al., “The Canadian Adverse Events Study: The Incidence of Adverse Events
among Hospital Patients in Canada,” Canadian Medical Association Journal  170, no. 1 1 (2004):
1678–86; A. C. McFarlane, et al., “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in a General Psychiatric
Inpatient Population,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  14, no. 4 (2001): 633–45; Kim T . Mueser , et
al., “T rauma and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Severe Mental Illness,” Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology  66, no. 3 (1998): 493; National T rauma Consortium,
www .nationaltraumaconsortium.or g.
2 . E. Bleuler , Dementia Praecox or the Gr oup of Schizophr enias , trans. J. Zinkin ( W ashington, DC :
International Universities Press, 1950), p. 227.
3 . L. Grinspoon, J. Ewalt, and R. I. Shader , “Psychotherapy and Pharmacotherapy in Chronic
Schizophrenia,” American Journal of Psychiatry  124, no. 12 (1968): 1645–52. See also L.
Grinspoon, J. Ewalt, and R. I. Shader , Schizophr enia: Psychotherapy and Pharmacotherapy
(Baltimore: W illiams and W ilkins, 1972).
4 . T . R. Insel, “Neuroscience: Shining Light on Depression,” Science  317, no. 5839 (2007): 757–
58. See also C. M. France, P . H. L ysaker , and R. P . Robinson, “The ‘Chemical Imbalance’
Explanation for Depression: Origins, Lay Endorsement, and Clinical Implications,” Pr ofessional
Psychology: Resear ch and Practice  38 (2007): 41 1–20.
5 . B. J. Deacon, and J. J. Lickel, “On the Brain Disease Model of Mental Disorders,” Behavior
Therapist  32, no. 6 (2009).
6 . J. O. Cole, et al., “Drug T rials in Persistent Dyskinesia (Clozapine),” in T ar dive Dyskinesia,
Resear ch and T r eatment , ed. R. C. Smith, J. M. Davis, and W . E. Fahn (New Y ork: Plenum,
1979).
7 . E. F . T orrey , Out of the Shadows: Confr onting America’ s Mental Illness Crisis  (New Y ork: John
W iley & Sons, 1997). However , other factors were equally important, such as President
Kennedy’ s 1963 Community Mental Health Act, in which the federal government took over
paying for mental health care and which rewarded states for treating mentally ill people in the
community .
8 . American Psychiatric Association, Committee on Nomenclature. W ork Group to Revise DSM-
III. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor ders  (American Psychiatric Publishing,
1980).9 . S. F . Maier and M. E. Seligman, “Learned Helplessness: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General  105, no. 1 (1976): 3. See also M. E. Seligman, S. F . Maier ,
and J. H. Geer , “Alleviation of Learned Helplessness in the Dog,” Journal of Abnormal
Psychology  73 , no. 3 (1968): 256; and R. L. Jackson, J. H. Alexander , and S. F . Maier , “Learned
Helplessness, Inactivity , and Associative Deficits: Ef fects of Inescapable Shock on Response
Choice Escape Learning,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Pr ocesses  6 ,
no. 1 (1980): 1.
10 . G. A. Bradshaw and A. N. Schore, “How Elephants Are Opening Doors: Developmental
Neuroethology , Attachment and Social Context,” Ethology  1 13 (2007): 426–36.
1 1 . D. Mitchell, S. Koleszar , and R. A. Scopatz, “Arousal and T -Maze Choice Behavior in Mice: A
Conver gent Paradigm for Neophobia Constructs and Optimal Arousal Theory ,” Learning and
Motivation 15 (1984): 287–301. See also D. Mitchell, E. W . Osborne, and M. W . O’Boyle,
“Habituation Under Stress: Shocked Mice Show Nonassociative Learning in a T -maze,”
Behavioral and Neural Biology  43 (1985): 212–17.
12 . B. A. van der Kolk, et al., “Inescapable Shock, Neurotransmitters and Addiction to T rauma:
T owards a Psychobiology of Post T raumatic Stress,” Biological Psychiatry  20 (1985): 414–25.
13 . C. Hedges, W ar Is a For ce That Gives Us Meaning  (New Y ork: Random House Digital, 2003).
14 . B. A. van der Kolk, “The Compulsion to Repeat T rauma: Revictimization, Attachment and
Masochism,” Psychiatric Clinics of North America  12 (1989): 389–41 1.
15 . R. L. Solomon, “The Opponent-Process Theory of Acquired Motivation: The Costs of Pleasure
and the Benefits of Pain,” American Psychologist  35 (1980): 691–712.
16 . H. K. Beecher , “Pain in Men W ounded in Battle,” Annals of Sur gery  123, no. 1 (January 1946):
96–105.
17 . B. A. van der Kolk, et al., “Pain Perception and Endogenous Opioids in Post T raumatic Stress
Disorder ,” Psychopharmacology Bulletin  25 (1989): 1 17–21. See also R. K. Pitman, et al.,
“Naloxone Reversible Stress Induced Analgesia in Post T raumatic Stress Disorder ,” Ar chives of
General Psychiatry  47 (1990): 541–47; and Solomon, “Opponent-Process Theory of Acquired
Motivation.”
18 . J. A. Gray and N. McNaughton, “The Neuropsychology of Anxiety: Reprise,” in Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation  (University of Nebraska Press, 1996), 43, 61–134. See also C. G.
DeY oung and J. R. Gray , “Personality Neuroscience: Explaining Individual Dif ferences in
Af fect, Behavior , and Cognition, in The Cambridge Handbook of Personality Psychology
(2009) , 323–46.
19 . M. J. Raleigh, et al., “Social and Environmental Influences on Blood Serotonin Concentrations
in Monkeys,” Ar chives of General Psychiatry  41 (1984): 505–10.
20 . B. A. van der Kolk, et al., “Fluoxetine in Post T raumatic Stress,” Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry  (1994): 517–22.
21 . For the Rorschach aficionados among you, it reversed the C + CF/FC ratio.
22 . Grace E. Jackson, Rethinking Psychiatric Drugs: A Guide for Informed Consent
(AuthorHouse, 2005); Robert Whitaker , Anatomy of an Epidemic: Magic Bullets, Psychiatric
Drugs and the Astonishing Rise of Mental Illness in America (New Y ork: Random House,
201 1).
23 . W e will return to this issue in chapter 15, where we discuss our study comparing Prozac with
EMDR, in which EMDR had better long-term results than Prozac in treating depression, at least
in adult onset trauma.
24 . J. M. Zito, et al., “Psychotropic Practice Patterns for Y outh: A 10-Y ear Perspective,” Ar chives
of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine  157 (January 2003): 17–25.
25 . http://en.wikipedia.or g/wiki/List_of_lar gest_selling_pharmaceutical_products.26 . Lucette Lagnado, “U.S. Probes Use of Antipsychotic Drugs on Children,” W all Str eet Journal ,
August 1 1, 2013.
27 . Katie Thomas, “J.&J. to Pay $2.2 Billion in Risperdal Settlement,” New Y ork T imes , November
4, 2013.
28 . M. Olfson, et al., “T rends in Antipsychotic Drug Use by V ery Y oung, Privately Insured
Children,” Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry  49 ,  no.1 (2010):
13–23.
29 . M. Olfson, et al., “National T rends in the Outpatient T reatment of Children and Adolescents
with Antipsychotic Drugs,” Ar chives of General Psychiatry  63 ,  no. 6 (2006): 679.
30 . A. J. Hall, et al., “Patterns of Abuse Among Unintentional Pharmaceutical Overdose
Fatalities,” Journal of the American Medical Association  300 ,  no. 22 (2008): 2613–20.
31 . During the past decade two editors in chief of the most prestigious professional medical journal
in the United States, the New England Journal of Medicine , Dr . Marcia Angell and Dr . Arnold
Relman, have resigned from their positions because of the excessive power of the
pharmaceutical industry over medical research, hospitals, and doctors. In a letter to the New
Y ork T imes  on December 28, 2004, Angell and Relman pointed out that the previous year one
drug company had spent 28 percent of its revenues (more than $6 billion) on marketing and
administrative expenses, while spending only half that on research and development; keeping 30
percent in net income was typical for the pharmaceutical industry . They concluded: “The
medical profession should break its dependence on the pharmaceutical industry and educate its
own.” Unfortunately , this is about as likely as politicians breaking free from the donors that
finance their election campaigns.
CHAPTER 3: LOOKING INT O THE BRAIN: THE NEUROSCIENCE REV OLUTION
1 . B. Roozendaal, B. S. McEwen, and S. Chattarji, “Stress, Memory and the Amygdala,” Natur e
Reviews Neur oscience  10 ,  no. 6 (2009): 423–33.
2 . R. Joseph, The Right Brain and the Unconscious  (New Y ork: Plenum Press, 1995).
3 . The movie The Assault  (based on the novel of the same name by Harry Mulisch), which won the
Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film in 1986, is a good illustration of the power of deep early
emotional impressions in determining powerful passions in adults.
4 . This is the essence of cognitive behavioral therapy . See Foa, Friedman, and Keane, 2000
T r eatment Guidelines for PTSD.
CHAPTER 4: RUNNING FOR YOUR LIFE: THE ANA T OMY OF SUR VIV AL
1 . R. Sperry , “Changing Priorities,” Annual Review of Neur oscience  4 (1981): 1–15.
2 . A. A. Lima, et al., “The Impact of T onic Immobility Reaction on the Prognosis of Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder ,” Journal of Psychiatric Resear ch  44, no. 4 (March 2010): 224–28.
3 . P . Janet, L ’automatisme psychologique  (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1889).
4 . R. R. Llinás, I of the V ortex: Fr om Neur ons to Self  (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002). See also
R. Carter and C. D. Frith, Mapping the Mind  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998);
R. Carter , The Human Brain Book  (Penguin, 2009); and J. J. Ratey , A User ’ s Guide to the Brain
(New Y ork: Pantheon Books, 2001), 179.
5 . B. D. Perry , et al., “Childhood T rauma, the Neurobiology of Adaptation, and Use Dependent
Development of the Brain: How States Become T raits,” Infant Mental Health Journal  16 ,  no. 4
(1995): 271–91.6 . I am indebted to my late friend David Servan-Schreiber , who first made this distinction in his
book The Instinct to Heal .
7 . E. Goldber g, The Executive Brain: Fr ontal Lobes and the Civilized Mind (London, Oxford
University Press, 2001).
8 . G. Rizzolatti and L. Craighero “The Mirror -Neuron System,” Annual Review of Neur oscience
27 (2004): 169–92. See also M. Iacoboni, et al., “Cortical Mechanisms of Human Imitation,”
Science  286, no. 5449 (1999): 2526–28; C. Keysers and V . Gazzola, “Social Neuroscience:
Mirror Neurons Recorded in Humans,” Curr ent Biology  20, no. 8 (2010): R353–54; J. Decety
and P . L. Jackson, “The Functional Architecture of Human Empathy ,” Behavioral and Cognitive
Neur oscience Reviews  3 (2004): 71–100; M. B. Schippers, et al., “Mapping the Information
Flow from One Brain to Another During Gestural Communication,” Pr oceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  107, no. 20 (2010): 9388–93; and
A. N. Meltzof f and J. Decety , “What Imitation T ells Us About Social Cognition: A
Rapprochement Between Developmental Psychology and Cognitive Neuroscience,”
Philosophical T ransactions of the Royal Society , London  358 (2003): 491–500.
9 . D. Goleman, Emotional Intelligence (New Y ork: Random House, 2006). See also V . S.
Ramachandran, “Mirror Neurons and Imitation Learning as the Driving Force Behind ‘the Great
Leap Forward’ in Human Evolution,” Edge (May 31, 2000),
http://edge.or g/conversation/mirror -neurons-and-imitation-learning-as-the-driving-force-behind-
the-great-leap-forward-in-human-evolution (retrieved April 13, 2013).
10 . G. M. Edelman, and J. A. Gally , “Reentry: A Key Mechanism for Integration of Brain
Function,” Fr ontiers in Integrative Neur oscience 7 (2013).
1 1 . J. LeDoux, “Rethinking the Emotional Brain,” Neur on 73, no. 4 (2012): 653–76. See also J. S.
Feinstein, et al., “The Human Amygdala and the Induction and Experience of Fear ,” Curr ent
Biology  21 ,  no. 1 (201 1): 34–38.
12 . The medial prefrontal cortex is the middle part of the brain (neuroscientists call them “the
midline structures”). This area of the brain comprises a conglomerate of related structures: the
orbito-prefrontal cortex, the inferior and dorsal medial prefrontal cortex, and a lar ge structure
called the anterior cingulate, all of which are involved in monitoring the internal state of the
or ganism and selecting the appropriate response. See, e.g., D. Diorio, V . V iau, and M. J.
Meaney , “The Role of the Medial Prefrontal Cortex (Cingulate Gyrus) in the Regulation of
Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal Responses to Stress,” Journal of Neur oscience  13, no. 9
(September 1993): 3839–47; J. P . Mitchell, M. R. Banaji, and C. N. Macrae, “The Link Between
Social Cognition and Self-Referential Thought in the Medial Prefrontal Cortex,” Journal of
Cognitive Neur oscience 17,  no . 8. (2005): 1306–15;  A. D’Ar gembeau, et al., “V aluing One’ s
Self: Medial Prefrontal Involvement in Epistemic and Emotive Investments in Self-V iews,”
Cer ebral Cortex  22 (March 2012): 659–67; M. A. Mor gan, L. M. Romanski, J. E. LeDoux,
“Extinction of Emotional Learning: Contribution of Medial Prefrontal Cortex,” Neur oscience
Letters 163 (1993):109–13; L. M. Shin, S. L. Rauch, and R. K. Pitman, “Amygdala, Medial
Prefrontal Cortex, and Hippocampal Function in PTSD,” Annals of the New Y ork Academy of
Sciences 1071, no. 1 (2006): 67–79; L. M. W illiams, et al., “T rauma Modulates Amygdala and
Medial Prefrontal Responses to Consciously Attended Fear ,” Neuroimage, 29, no. 2 (2006):
347–57; M. Koenig and J. Grafman, “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: The Role of Medial
Prefrontal Cortex and Amygdala,” Neur oscientist 15, no. 5 (2009): 540–48; and M. R. Milad, I.
V idal-Gonzalez, and G. J. Quirk, “Electrical Stimulation of Medial Prefrontal Cortex Reduces
Conditioned Fear in a T emporally Specific Manner ,” Behavioral Neur oscience 1 18, no. 2
(2004): 389.13 . B. A. van der Kolk, “Clinical Implications of Neuroscience Research in PTSD,” Annals of the
New Y ork Academy of Sciences 1071 (2006): 277–93.
14 . P . D. MacLean, The T riune Brain in Evolution: Role in Paleocer ebral Functions (New Y ork,
Springer , 1990).
15 . Ute Lawrence, The Power of T rauma: Conquering Post T raumatic Str ess Disor der , iUniverse,
2009.
16 . Rita Carter and Christopher D. Frith, Mapping the Mind  (Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1998). See also A. Bechara, et al., “Insensitivity to Future Consequences Following
Damage to Human Prefrontal Cortex,” Cognition 50 , no. 1 (1994): 7–15; A. Pascual-Leone, et
al., “The Role of the Dorsolateral Prefrontal Cortex in Implicit Procedural Learning,”
Experimental Brain Resear ch  107 ,  no. 3 (1996): 479–85; and S. C. Rao, G. Rainer , and E. K.
Miller , “Integration of What and Where in the Primate Prefrontal Cortex,” Science  276 ,  no.
5313 (1997): 821–24.
17 . H. S. Duggal, “New-Onset PTSD After Thalamic Infarct,” American Journal of Psychiatry
159, no. 12 (2002): 21 13-a. See also R. A. Lanius, et al., “Neural Correlates of T raumatic
Memories in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Functional MRI Investigation,” American
Journal of Psychiatry  158 ,  no. 1 1 (2001): 1920–22; and I. Liberzon, et al., “Alteration of
Corticothalamic Perfusion Ratios During a PTSD Flashback,” Depr ession and Anxiety  4 ,  no. 3
(1996): 146–50.
18 . R. Noyes Jr . and R. Kletti, “Depersonalization in Response to Life-Threatening Danger ,”
Compr ehensive Psychiatry 18, no. 4 (1977): 375–84. See also M. Sierra, and G. E. Berrios,
“Depersonalization: Neurobiological Perspectives,” Biological Psychiatry  44 ,  no. 9 (1998):
898–908.
19 . D. Church, et al., “Single-Session Reduction of the Intensity of T raumatic Memories in Abused
Adolescents After EFT : A Randomized Controlled Pilot Study ,” T raumatology 18, no. 3 (2012):
73–79; and D. Feinstein and D. Church, “Modulating Gene Expression Through Psychotherapy:
The Contribution of Noninvasive Somatic Interventions,” Review of General Psychology  14, no.
4 (2010): 283–95. See also www .vetcases.com.
CHAPTER 5: BODY -BRAIN CONNECTIONS
1 . C. Darwin, The Expr ession of the Emotions in Man and Animals  (London: Oxford University
Press, 1998).
2 . Ibid., 71.
3 . Ibid.
4 . Ibid., 71–72.
5 . P . Ekman, Facial Action Coding System: A T echnique for the Measur ement of Facial Movement
(Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press, 1978). See also C. E. Izard, The Maximally
Discriminative Facial Movement Coding System (MAX)  (Newark, DE: University of Delaware
Instructional Resource Center , 1979).
6 . S. W . Por ges, The Polyvagal Theory: Neur ophysiological Foundations of Emotions, Attachment,
Communication, and Self-Regulation , Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology (New Y ork:
WW Norton & Company , 201 1).
7 . This is Stephen Por ges’ s and Sue Carter ’ s name for the ventral vagal system.
http://www .pesi.com/bookstore/A_Neural_Love_Code__The_Body_s_Need_to_Engage_and_B
ond-details.aspx
8 . S. S. T omkins, Affect, Imagery , Consciousness  (vol. 1, The Positive Affects ) (New Y ork:
Springer , 1962); S. S. T omkin, Affect, Imagery , Consciousness  (vol. 2, The Negative Affects)(New Y ork: Springer , 1963).
9 . P . Ekman, Emotions  Revealed: Recognizing Faces and Feelings to Impr ove Communication and
Emotional Life  (New Y ork: Macmillan, 2007); P . Ekman, The Face of Man: Expr essions of
Universal Emotions in a New Guinea V illage (New Y ork: Garland STPM Press, 1980).
10 . See, e.g., B. M. Levinson, “Human/Companion Animal Therapy ,” Journal of Contemporary
Psychotherapy  14, no. 2 (1984): 131–44; D. A. W illis, “Animal Therapy ,” Rehabilitation
Nursing 22, no. 2 (1997): 78–81; and A. H. Fine, ed., Handbook on Animal-Assisted Therapy:
Theor etical Foundations and Guidelines for Practice  (Academic Press, 2010).
1 1 . P . Ekman, R. W . Levenson, and W . V . Friesen, “Autonomic Nervous System Activity
Distinguishes Between Emotions,” Science  221 (1983): 1208–10.
12 . J. H. Jackson, “Evolution and Dissolution of the Nervous System,” in Selected W ritings of
John Hughlings Jackson , ed. J. T aylor (London: Stapes Press, 1958), 45–1 18.
13 . Por ges pointed out this pet store analogy to me.
14 . S. W . Por ges, J. A. Doussard-Roosevelt, and A. K. Maiti, “V agal T one and the Physiological
Regulation of Emotion,” in The Development of  Emotion Regulation: Biological and Behavioral
Considerations ,  ed. N. A. Fox, Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development,
vol. 59 (2–3, serial no. 240) (1994), 167–86. http://www .amazon.com/The-Development-
Emotion-Regulation-Considerations/dp/0226259404).
15 . V . Felitti, et al., “Relationship of Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to Many of the
Leading Causes of Death in Adults: The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study ,”
American Journal of Pr eventive Medicine  14, no. 4 (1998): 245–58.
16 . S. W . Por ges, “Orienting in a Defensive W orld: Mammalian Modifications of Our
Evolutionary Heritage: A Polyvagal Theory ,” Psychophysiology  32 (1995): 301–18.
17 . B. A. V an der Kolk, “The Body Keeps the Score: Memory and the Evolving Psychobiology of
Posttraumatic Stress,” Harvar d Review of Psychiatry  1, no. 5 (1994): 253–65.
CHAPTER 6: LOSING YOUR BODY , LOSING YOUR SELF
1 . K. L. W alsh, et al., “Resiliency Factors in the Relation Between Childhood Sexual Abuse and
Adulthood Sexual Assault in College-Age W omen,” Journal of Child Sexual Abuse 16, no. 1
(2007): 1–17.
2 . A. C. McFarlane, “The Long‐T erm Costs of T raumatic Stress: Intertwined Physical and
Psychological Consequences,” W orld Psychiatry 9, no. 1 (2010): 3–10.
3 . W . James, “What Is an Emotion?” Mind 9: 188–205.
4 . R. L. Bluhm, et al., “Alterations in Default Network Connectivity in Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder Related to Early-Life T rauma,” Journal of Psychiatry & Neur oscience  34, no. 3
(2009): 187. See also J. K. Daniels, et al., “Switching Between Executive and Default Mode
Networks in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Alterations in Functional Connectivity ,” Journal of
Psychiatry & Neur oscience  35, no. 4 (2010): 258.
5 . A. Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness
(New Y ork: Hartcourt Brace, 1999). Damasio actually says, “Consciousness was invented so
that we could know life”, p. 31.
6 . Damasio, Feeling of What Happens, p.  28.
7 . Ibid., p. 29.
8 . A. Damasio, Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain  (New Y ork, Random
House Digital, 2012), 17.
9 . Damasio, Feeling of What Happens , p. 256.10 . Antonio R. Damasio, et al., “Subcortical and Cortical Brain Activity During the Feeling of
Self-Generated Emotions.” Natur e Neur oscience  3, vol. 10 (2000): 1049–56.
1 1 . A. A. T . S. Reinders, et al., “One Brain, T wo Selves,” Neur oImage  20 (2003): 21 19–25. See
also E. R. S. Nijenhuis, O. V an der Hart, and K. Steele, “The Emer ging Psychobiology of
T rauma-Related Dissociation and Dissociative Disorders,” in Biological Psychiatry , vol. 2., eds.
H. A. H. D’Haenen, J. A. den Boer , and P . W illner (W est Sussex, UK: W iley 2002), 1079–198;
J. Parvizi and A. R. Damasio, “Consciousness and the Brain Stem,” Cognition  79 (2001): 135–
59; F . W . Putnam, “Dissociation and Disturbances of Self,” in Dysfunctions of the Self , vol. 5,
eds. D. Cicchetti and S. L. T oth (New Y ork: University of Rochester Press, 1994), 251–65; and
F . W . Putnam, Dissociation in Childr en and Adolescents: A Developmental Perspective  (New
Y ork: Guilford, 1997).
12 . A. D’Ar gembeau, et al., “Distinct Regions of the Medial Prefrontal Cortex Are Associated
with Self-Referential Processing and Perspective T aking,” Journal of Cognitive Neur oscience
19, no. 6 (2007): 935–44. See also N. A. Farb, et al., “Attending to the Present: Mindfulness
Meditation Reveals Distinct Neural Modes of Self-Reference,” Social Cognitive and Affective
Neur oscience 2, no. 4 (2007): 313–22; and B. K. Hölzel, et al., “Investigation of Mindfulness
Meditation Practitioners with V oxel-Based Morphometry ,” Social Cognitive and Affective
Neur oscience  3, no. 1 (2008): 55–61.
13 . P . A. Levine, Healing T rauma: A Pioneering Pr ogram for Restoring the W isdom of Y our Body
(Berkeley: North Atlantic Books, 2008); and P . A. Levine, In an Unspoken V oice: How the Body
Releases T rauma and Restor es Goodness  (Berkeley: North Atlantic Books, 2010).
14 . P . Ogden and K. Minton, “Sensorimotor Psychotherapy: One Method for Processing T raumatic
Memory ,” T raumatology 6, no. 3 (2000): 149–73; and P . Ogden, K. Minton, and C. Pain,
T rauma and the Body: A Sensorimotor Appr oach to Psychotherapy , Norton Series on
Interpersonal Neurobiology (New Y ork: WW Norton & Company , 2006).
15 . D. A. Bakal, Minding the Body: Clinical Uses of Somatic A war eness  (New Y ork: Guilford
Press, 2001).
16 . There are innumerable studies on the subject. A small sample for further study: J. W olfe, et al.,
“Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and W ar -Zone Exposure as Correlates of Perceived Health in
Female V ietnam W ar V eterans,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  62, no. 6
(1994): 1235–40; L. A. Zoellner , M. L. Goodwin, and E. B. Foa, “PTSD Severity and Health
Perceptions in Female V ictims of Sexual Assault,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  13, no. 4 (2000):
635–49; E. M. Sledjeski, B. Speisman, and L. C. Dierker , “Does Number of Lifetime T raumas
Explain the Relationship Between PTSD and Chronic Medical Conditions? Answers from the
National Comorbidity Survey-Replication (NCS-R),” Journal of Behavioral Medicine 3 1
(2008): 341–49; J. A. Boscarino, “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Physical Illness: Results
from Clinical and Epidemiologic Studies,” Annals of the New Y ork Academy of Sciences  1032
(2004): 141–53; M. Cloitre, et al., “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Extent of T rauma
Exposure as Correlates of Medical Problems and Perceived Health Among W omen with
Childhood Abuse,” W omen & Health  34, no. 3 (2001): 1–17; D. Lauterbach, R. V ora, and M.
Rakow , “The Relationship Between Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Self-Reported Health
Problems,” Psychosomatic Medicine  67, no. 6 (2005): 939–47; B. S. McEwen, “Protective and
Damaging Ef fects of Stress Mediators,” New England Journal of Medicine  338, no. 3 (1998):
171–79; P . P . Schnurr and B. L. Green, T rauma and Health: Physical Health Consequences of
Exposur e to Extr eme Str ess  (W ashington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2004).
17 . P . K. T rickett, J. G. Noll, and F . W . Putnam, “The Impact of Sexual Abuse on Female
Development: Lessons from a Multigenerational, Longitudinal Research Study ,” Development
and Psychopathology 23, no. 2 (201 1): 453.18 . K. Kosten and F . Giller Jr ., ”Alexithymia as a Predictor of T reatment Response in Post-
T raumatic Stress Disorder ,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  5, no. 4 (October 1992): 563–73.
19 . G. J. T aylor and R. M. Bagby , “New T rends in Alexithymia Research,” Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics 73, no. 2 (2004): 68–77.
20 . R. D. Lane, et al., “Impaired V erbal and Nonverbal Emotion Recognition in Alexithymia,”
Psychosomatic Medicine  58, no. 3 (1996): 203–10.
21 . H. Krystal and J. H. Krystal, Integration and Self-Healing: Affect, T rauma, Alexithymia  (New
Y ork: Analytic Press, 1988).
22 . P . Frewen, et al., “Clinical and Neural Correlates of Alexithymia in Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder ,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology  1 17, no. 1 (2008): 171–81.
23 . D. Finkelhor , R. K. Ormrod, and H. A. T urner , (2007). “Re-V ictimization Patterns in a
National Longitudinal Sample of Children and Y outh,” Child Abuse & Neglect  31, no. 5 (2007):
479-502; J. A. Schumm, S. E. Hobfoll, and N. J. Keogh, “Revictimization and Interpersonal
Resource Loss Predicts PTSD Among W omen in Substance-Use T reatment, Journal of
T raumatic Str ess,  17, no. 2 (2004): 173–81; J. D. Ford, J. D. Elhai, D. F . Connor , and B. C.
Frueh, “Poly-V ictimization and Risk of Posttraumatic, Depressive, and Substance Use Disorders
and Involvement in Delinquency in a National Sample of Adolescents,” Journal of Adolescent
Health , 46, no. 6 (2010): 545–52.
24 . P . Schilder , “Depersonalization,” in Intr oduction to a Psychoanalytic Psychiatry , no. 50 (New
Y ork: International Universities Press, 196), p. 120.
25 . S. Arzy , et al., “Neural Mechanisms of Embodiment: Asomatognosia Due to Premotor Cortex
Damage,” Ar chives of Neur ology  63, no. 7 (2006): 1022–25. See also S. Arzy et al., “Induction
of an Illusory Shadow Person,” Natur e  443, no. 7109 (2006): 287; S. Arzy et al., “Neural Basis
of Embodiment: Distinct Contributions of T emporoparietal Junction and Extrastriate Body
Area,” Journal of Neur oscience  26, no. 31 (2006): 8074–81; O. Blanke et al., “Out-of-Body
Experience and Autoscopy of Neurological Origin,” Brain  127, part 2 (2004): 243–58; and M.
Sierra, et al., “Unpacking the Depersonalization Syndrome: An Exploratory Factor Analysis on
the Cambridge Depersonalization Scale,” Psychological Medicine  35 (2005): 1523–32.
26 . A. A. T . Reinders, et al., “Psychobiological Characteristics of Dissociative Identity Disorder: A
Symptom Provocation Study ,” Biological Psychiatry 60, no. 7 (2006): 730–40.
27 . In his book Focusing , Eugene Gendlin coined the term “felt sense”: “A felt sense is not a
mental experience but a physical one. A bodily awareness of a situation or person or event;
Focusing  (New Y ork, Random House Digital, 1982).
28 . C. Steuwe, et al., “Ef fect of Direct Eye Contact in PTSD Related to Interpersonal T rauma: An
fMRI Study of Activation of an Innate Alarm System,” Social Cognitive and Affective
Neur oscience  9, no. 1 (January 2012): 88–97.
CHAPTER 7: GETTING ON THE SAME W A VELENGTH, A TT ACHMENT AND
A TTUNEMENT
1 . N. Murray , E. Koby , and B. van der Kolk, “The Ef fects of Abuse on Children’ s Thoughts,”
chapter 4 in Psychological T rauma ( W ashington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, 1987).
2 . The attachment researcher Mary Main told six-year -olds a story about a child whose mother had
gone away and asked them to make up a story of what happened next. Most six-year -olds who,
as infants, had been found to have secure relationships with their mothers made up some
imaginative tale with a good ending, while the kids who five years earlier had been classified as
having a disor ganized attachment relationship had a tendency toward catastrophic fantasies and
often gave frightened responses like “The parents will die” or “The child will kill herself.” InMary Main, Nancy Kaplan, and Jude Cassidy . “Security in Infancy , Childhood, and Adulthood:
A Move to the Level of Representation,” Monographs of the Society for Resear ch in Child
Development  (1985).
3 . J. Bowlby , Attachment and Loss , vol. 1, Attachment  (New Y ork Random House, 1969); J.
Bowlby , Attachment and Loss , vol. 2, Separation: Anxiety and Anger  (New Y ork: Penguin,
1975); J. Bowlby , Attachment and Loss , vol. 3, Loss: Sadness and Depr ession  (New Y ork:
Basic, 1980); J. Bowlby , “The Nature of the Child’ s T ie to His Mother 1,”  International Journal
of Psycho-Analysis,  1958, 39, 350–73.
4 . C. T revarthen, “Musicality and the Intrinsic Motive Pulse: Evidence from Human
Psychobiology and Rhythms, Musical Narrative, and the Origins of Human Communication,”
Muisae Scientiae,  special issue, 1999, 157–213.
5 . A. Gopnik and A. N. Meltzof f, W or ds, Thoughts, and Theories  (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997);
A. N. Meltzof f and M. K. Moore, “Newborn Infants Imitate Adult Facial Gestures,” Child
Development  54, no. 3 (June 1983): 702–9; A. Gopnik, A. N. Meltzof f, and P . K. Kuhl, The
Scientist in the Crib: Minds, Brains, and How Childr en Learn  (New Y ork: HarperCollins,
2009).
6 . E. Z. T ronick, “Emotions and Emotional Communication in Infants,” American Psychologist 44,
no. 2 (1989): 1 12. See also E. T ronick, The Neur obehavioral and Social-Emotional
Development of Infants and Childr en  (New Y ork, WW Norton & Company , 2007); E. T ronick
and M. Beeghly , “Infants’ Meaning-Making and the Development of Mental Health Problems,”
American Psychologist 66, no. 2 (201 1): 107; and A. V . Sravish, et al., “Dyadic Flexibility
During the Face-to-Face Still-Face Paradigm: A Dynamic Systems Analysis of Its T emporal
Or ganization,” Infant Behavior and Development 36, no. 3 (2013): 432–37.
7 . M. Main, “Overview of the Field of Attachment,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology  64, no. 2 (1996): 237–43.
8 . D. W . W innicott, Playing and Reality  (New Y ork: Psychology Press, 1971). See also D. W .
W innicott, “The Maturational Processes and the Facilitating Environment,” (1965); and D. W .
W innicott, Thr ough Paediatrics to Psycho-analysis: Collected Papers  (New Y ork:
Brunner/Mazel, 1975).
9 . As we saw in chapter 6, and as Damasio has demonstrated, this sense of inner reality is, at least
in part, rooted in the insula, the brain structure that plays a central role in body-mind
communication, a structure that is often impaired in people with histories of chronic trauma.
10 . D. W . W innicott, Primary Maternal Pr eoccupation  (London: T avistock, 1956), 300–305.
1 1 . S. D. Pollak, et al., “Recognizing Emotion in Faces: Developmental Ef fects of Child Abuse
and Neglect,” Developmental Psychology 36, no. 5 (2000): 679.
12 . P . M. Crittenden, “IV Peering into the Black Box: An Exploratory T reatise on the Development
of Self in Y oung Children,” Disor ders and Dysfunctions of the Self  5 (1994): 79; P . M.
Crittenden, and A. Landini, Assessing Adult Attachment: A Dynamic-Maturational Appr oach to
Discourse Analysis  (New Y ork: WW Norton & Company , 201 1).
13 . Patricia M. Crittenden, “Children’ s Strategies for Coping with Adverse Home Environments:
An Interpretation Using Attachment Theory ,” Child Abuse & Neglect  16, no. 3 (1992): 329–43.
14 . Main, 1990, op cit.
15 . Main, 1990, op cit.
16 . Ibid.
17 . E. Hesse, and M. Main, “Frightened, Threatening, and Dissociative Parental Behavior in Low-
Risk Samples: Description, Discussion, and Interpretations,” Development and Psychopathology
18, no. 2 (2006): 309–343. See also E. Hesse and M. Main, “Disor ganized Infant, Child, andAdult Attachment: Collapse in Behavioral and Attentional Strategies,” Journal of the American
Psychoanalytic Association 48, no. 4 (2000): 1097–127.
18 . Main, “Overview of the Field of Attachment,” op cit.
19 . Hesse and Main, 1995, op cit, p. 310.
20 . W e looked at this from a biological point of view when we discussed “immobilization without
fear” in chapter 5. S. W . Por ges, “Orienting in a Defensive W orld: Mammalian Modifications of
Our Evolutionary Heritage: A Polyvagal Theory ,” Psychophysiology  32 (1995): 301–318.
21 . M. H. van Ijzendoorn, C. Schuengel, and M. Bakermans-Kranenbur g, “Disor ganized
Attachment in Early Childhood: Meta-analysis of Precursors, Concomitants, and Sequelae,”
Development and Psychopathology  1 1 (1999): 225–49.
22 . Ijzendoorn, op cit.
23 . N. W . Boris, M. Fueyo, and C. H. Zeanah, “The Clinical Assessment of Attachment in
Children Under Five,” Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry ,  36,
no. 2 (1997): 291–93; K. L yons-Ruth, “Attachment Relationships Among Children with
Aggressive Behavior Problems: The Role of Disor ganized Early Attachment Patterns,” Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology ,  64, no. 1 (1996), 64.
24 . Stephen W . Por ges, et al., “Infant Regulation of the V agal ‘Brake’ Predicts Child Behavior
Problems: A Psychobiological Model of Social Behavior ,” Developmental Psychobiology  29,
no. 8 (1996): 697–712.
25 . Louise Hertsgaard, et al., “Adrenocortical Responses to the Strange Situation in Infants with
Disor ganized/Disoriented Attachment Relationships,” Child Development 66, no. 4 (1995):
1 100–6; Gottfried Spangler , and Klaus E. Grossmann, “Biobehavioral Or ganization in Securely
and Insecurely Attached Infants,” Child Development  64, no. 5 (1993): 1439–50.
26 . Main and Hesse, 1990, op cit.
27 . M. H. van Ijzendoorn, et al., “Disor ganized Attachment in Early Childhood,” op cit.
28 . B. Beebe, and F . M. Lachmann, Infant Resear ch and Adult T r eatment: Co-constructing
Interactions  (New Y ork: Routledge, 2013); B. Beebe, F . Lachmann, and J. Jaf fe (1997). Mother -
Infant Interaction Structures and Presymbolic Self‐ and Object Representations. Psychoanalytic
Dialogues, 7, no. 2 (1997): 133–82.
29 . R. Y ehuda, et al., “V ulnerability to Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Adult Of fspring of
Holocaust Survivors,” American Journal of Psychiatry 155, no. 9 (1998): 1 163–71. See also R.
Y ehuda, et al., “Relationship Between Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Characteristics of
Holocaust Survivors and Their Adult Of fspring,” American Journal of Psychiatry  155, no. 6
(1998): 841–43; R. Y ehuda, et al., “Parental Posttraumatic Stress Disorder as a V ulnerability
Factor for Low Cortisol T rait in Of fspring of Holocaust Survivors,” Ar chives of General
Psychiatry 64, no. 9 (2007): 1040 and R. Y ehuda, et al., “Maternal, Not Paternal, PTSD Is
Related to Increased Risk for PTSD in Of fspring of Holocaust Survivors,” Journal of
Psychiatric Resear ch 42, no. 13 (2008): 1 104–1 1.
30 . R. Y ehuda, et al., “T ransgenerational Ef fects of PTSD in Babies of Mothers Exposed to the
WTC Attacks During Pregnancy ,” Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 90
(2005): 41 15–18.
31 . G. Saxe, et al., “Relationship Between Acute Morphine and the Course of PTSD in Children
with Burns,” Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 40, no. 8
(2001): 915–21. See also G. N. Saxe, et al., “Pathways to PTSD, Part I: Children with Burns,”
American Journal of Psychiatry  162, no. 7 (2005): 1299–304.
32 . C. M. Chemtob, Y . Nomura, and R. A. Abramovitz, “Impact of Conjoined Exposure to the
W orld T rade Center Attacks and to Other T raumatic Events on the Behavioral Problems of
Preschool Children,” Ar chives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine  162, no. 2 (2008): 126.See also P . J. Landrigan, et al., “Impact of September 1 1 W orld T rade Center Disaster on
Children and Pregnant W omen,” Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine  75, no. 2 (2008): 129–34.
33 . D. Finkelhor , R. K. Ormrod, and H. A. T urner , “Polyvictimization and T rauma in a National
Longitudinal Cohort,” Development and Psychopathology  19 ,  no. 1 (2007): 149–66; J. D. Ford,
et al., “Poly-victimization and Risk of Posttraumatic, Depressive, and Substance Use Disorders
and Involvement in Delinquency in a National Sample of Adolescents,” Journal of Adolescent
Health 46 ,  no. 6 (2010): 545–52; J. D. Ford, et al., “Clinical Significance of a Proposed
Development T rauma Disorder Diagnosis: Results of an International Survey of Clinicians,”
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  74 ,  no. 8 (2013): 841–49.
34 . Family Pathways Project, http://www .challiance.or g/academics/familypathwaysproject.aspx.
35 . K. L yons‐Ruth and D. Block, “The Disturbed Caregiving System: Relations Among Childhood
T rauma, Maternal Caregiving, and Infant Af fect and Attachment,” Infant Mental Health Journal
17, no. 3 (1996): 257–75.
36 . K. L yons-Ruth, “The T wo-Person Construction of Defenses: Disor ganized Attachment
Strategies, Unintegrated Mental States, and Hostile/Helpless Relational Processes,” Journal of
Infant, Child, and Adolescent Psychotherapy  2 (2003): 105.
37 . G. Whitmer , “On the Nature of Dissociation,” Psychoanalytic Quarterly 70, no. 4 (2001): 807–
37. See also K. L yons-Ruth, “The T wo-Person Construction of Defenses: Disor ganized
Attachment Strategies, Unintegrated Mental States, and Hostile/Helpless Relational Processes,”
Journal of Infant, Child, and Adolescent Psychotherapy  2, no. 4 (2002): 107–19.
38 . Mary S. Ainsworth and John Bowlby , “An Ethological Approach to Personality Development,”
American Psychologist  46, no. 4 (April 1991): 333–41.
39 . K. L yons-Ruth and D. Jacobvitz, 1999; Main, 1993; K. L yons-Ruth, “Dissociation and the
Parent-Infant Dialogue: A Longitudinal Perspective from Attachment Research,” Journal of the
American Psychoanalytic Association  51, no. 3 (2003): 883–91 1.
40 . L. Dutra, et al., “Quality of Early Care and Childhood T rauma: A Prospective Study of
Developmental Pathways to Dissociation,” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease  197, no. 6
(2009): 383. See also K. L yons-Ruth, et al., “Borderline Symptoms and Suicidality/Self-Injury
in Late Adolescence: Prospectively Observed Relationship Correlates in Infancy and
Childhood,” Psychiatry Resear ch  206, nos. 2–3 (April 30, 2013): 273–81.
41 . For meta-analysis of the relative contributions of disor ganized attachment and child
maltreatment, see C. Schuengel, et al., “Frightening Maternal Behavior Linking Unresolved
Loss and Disor ganized Infant Attachment,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 67,
no. 1 (1999): 54.
42 . K. L yons-Ruth and D. Jacobvitz, “Attachment Disor ganization: Genetic Factors, Parenting
Contexts, and Developmental T ransformation from Infancy to Adulthood,” in Handbook of
Attachment: Theory , Resear ch, and Clinical Applications , 2nd ed., ed. J. Cassidy and R. Shaver
(New Y ork: Guilford Press, 2008), 666–97. See also E. O’connor , et al., “Risks and Outcomes
Associated with Disor ganized/Controlling Patterns of Attachment at Age Three Y ears in the
National Institute of Child Health & Human Development Study of Early Child Care and Y outh
Development,” Infant Mental Health Journal  32 , no. 4 (201 1): 450–72; and K. L yons-Ruth, et
al., “Borderline Symptoms and Suicidality/Self-Injury .
43 . At this point we have little information about what factors af fect the evolution of these early
regulatory abnormalities, but intervening life events, the quality of other relationships, and
perhaps even genetic factors are likely to modify them over time. It is obviously critical to study
to what degree consistent and concentrated parenting of children with early histories of abuse
and neglect can rearrange biological systems.44 . E. W arner , et al., “Can the Body Change the Score? Application of Sensory Modulation
Principles in the T reatment of T raumatized Adolescents in Residential Settings,” Journal of
Family V iolence  28, no. 7 (2003): 729–38.
CHAPTER 8: TRAPPED IN RELA TIONSHIPS: THE COST OF ABUSE AND NEGLECT
1 . W . H. Auden, The Double Man  (New Y ork: Random House, 1941),
2 . S. N. W ilson, et al., “Phenotype of Blood L ymphocytes in PTSD Suggests Chronic Immune
Activation,” Psychosomatics  40 ,  no. 3 (1999): 222–25. See also M. Uddin, et al., “Epigenetic
and Immune Function Profiles Associated with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Pr oceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  107 ,  no. 20 (2010): 9470–75;
M. Altemus, M. Cloitre, and F . S. Dhabhar , “Enhanced Cellular Immune Response in W omen
with PTSD Related to Childhood Abuse,” American Journal of Psychiatry  160 ,  no. 9 (2003):
1705–7; and N. Kawamura, Y . Kim, and N. Asukai, “Suppression of Cellular Immunity in Men
with a Past History of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” American Journal of Psychiatry  158 ,  no.
3 (2001): 484–86.
3 . R. Summit, “The Child Sexual Abuse Accommodation Syndrome,” Child Abuse & Neglect  7
(1983): 177–93.
4 . A study using fMRI at the University of Lausanne in Switzerland showed that when people have
these out-of-body experiences, staring at themselves as if looking down from the ceiling, they
are activating the superior temporal cortex in the brain. O. Blanke, et al., “Linking Out-of-Body
Experience and Self Processing to Mental Own-Body Imagery at the T emporoparietal Junction,”
Journal of Neur oscience  25 ,  no. 3 (2005): 550–57. See also O. Blanke and T . Metzinger , “Full-
Body Illusions and Minimal Phenomenal Selfhood,” T r ends in Cognitive Sciences  13 ,  no. 1
(2009): 7–13.
5 . When an adult uses a child for sexual gratification, the child invariably is caught in a confusing
situation and a conflict of loyalties: By disclosing the abuse, she betrays and hurts the
perpetrator (who may be an adult on whom the child depends for safety and protection), but by
hiding the abuse, she compounds her shame and vulnerability . This dilemma was first
articulated by Sándor Ferenczi in 1933 in “The Confusion of T ongues Between the Adult and
the Child: The Language of T enderness and the Language of Passion,” International Journal of
Psychoanalysis , 30 no. 4 (1949): 225–30, and has been explored by numerous subsequent
authors.
CHAPTER 9: WHA T’S LOVE GOT T O DO WITH IT?
1 . Gary Greenber g, The Book of W oe: The DSM and the Unmaking of Psychiatry (New Y ork:
Penguin, 2013).
2 . http://www .thefreedictionary .com/diagnosis.
3 . The T AQ can be accessed at the T rauma Center W eb site:
www .traumacenter .or g/products/instruments.php.
4 . J. L. Herman, J. C. Perry , and B. A. van der Kolk, “Childhood T rauma in Borderline Personality
Disorder ,” American Journal of Psychiatry 146, no. 4 (April 1989): 490–95.
5 . T eicher found significant changes in the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), a region of the brain that is
involved in decision making and the regulation of behavior involved in sensitivity to social
demands. M. H. T eicher , et al., “The Neurobiological Consequences of Early Stress and
Childhood Maltreatment,” Neur oscience & Biobehavioral Reviews  27 ,  no. 1 (2003): 33–44. See
also M. H. T eicher , “Scars That W on’ t Heal: The Neurobiology of Child Abuse,” ScientificAmerican  286 ,  no. 3 (2002): 54–61; M. T eicher , et al., “Sticks, Stones, and Hurtful W ords:
Relative Ef fects of V arious Forms of Childhood Maltreatment,” American Journal of Psychiatry
163 ,  no. 6 (2006): 993–1000; A. Bechara, et al., “Insensitivity to Future Consequences
Following Damage to Human Prefrontal Cortex,” Cognition 50 (1994): 7–15 .  Impairment in this
area of the brain results in excessive swearing, poor social interactions, compulsive gambling,
excessive alcohol / drug use and poor empathic ability . M. L. Kringelbach and E. T . Rolls, “The
Functional Neuroanatomy of the Human Orbitofrontal Cortex: Evidence from Neuroimaging
and Neuropsychology ,” Pr ogr ess in Neur obiology 72 (2004): 341–72 . The other problematic
area T eicher identified was the precuneus, a brain area involved in understanding oneself and
being able to take perspective on how your perceptions may be dif ferent from someone else’ s .
A. E. Cavanna and M. R. T rimble “The Precuneus: A Review of Its Functional Anatomy and
Behavioural Correlates,” Brain  129 (2006): 564–83.
6 . S. Roth, et al., “Complex PTSD in V ictims Exposed to Sexual and Physical Abuse: Results from
the DSM-IV Field T rial for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  10
(1997): 539–55; B. A. van der Kolk et al., “Dissociation, Somatization, and Af fect
Dysregulation: The Complexity of Adaptation to T rauma,” American Journal of Psychiatry  153
(1996): 83–93; D. Pelcovitz, et al., “Development of a Criteria Set and a Structured Interview
for Disorders of Extreme Stress (SIDES),” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  10 (1997): 3–16; S. N.
Ogata, et al., “Childhood Sexual and Physical Abuse in Adult Patients with Borderline
Personality Disorder ,” American Journal of Psychiatry  147 (1990): 1008–1013; M. C. Zanarini,
et al., “Axis I Comorbidity of Borderline Personality Disorder ,” American Journal of Psychiatry
155, no. 12. (December 1998): 1733–39; S. L. Shearer , et al., “Frequency and Correlates of
Childhood Sexual and Physical Abuse Histories in Adult Female Borderline Inpatients,”
American Journal of Psychiatry  147 (1990): 214–16; D. W esten, et al., “Physical and Sexual
Abuse in Adolescent Girls with Borderline Personality Disorder ,” American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry  60 (1990): 55–66; M. C. Zanarini, et al., “Reported Pathological Childhood
Experiences Associated with the Development of Borderline Personality Disorder ,” American
Journal of Psychiatry 154 (1997): 1 101–1 106.
7 . J. Bowlby , A Secur e Base: Par ent-Child Attachment and Healthy Human Development  (New
Y ork: Basic Books, 2008), 103.
8 . B. A. van der Kolk, J. C. Perry , and J. L. Herman, “Childhood Origins of Self- Destructive
Behavior ,” American Journal of Psychiatry  148 (1991): 1665–71.
9 . This notion found further support in the work of the neuroscientist Jaak Panksepp, who found
that young rats that were not licked by their moms during the first week of their lives did not
develop opioid receptors in the anterior cingulate cortex, a part of the brain associated with
af filiation and a sense of safety . See E. E. Nelson and J. Panksepp, “Brain Substrates of Infant-
Mother Attachment: Contributions of Opioids, Oxytocin, and Norepinephrine,” Neur oscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews  22, no. 3 (1998): 437–52. See also J. Panksepp, et al., “Endogenous
Opioids and Social Behavior ,” Neur oscience & Biobehavioral Reviews  4 ,  no. 4 (1981): 473–87;
and J. Panksepp, E. Nelson, and S. Siviy , “Brain Opioids and Mother -Infant Social Motivation,”
Acta paediatrica  83 ,  no. 397 (1994): 40–46.
10 . The delegation to Robert Spitzer also included Judy Herman, Jim Chu, and David Pelcovitz.
1 1 . B. A. van der Kolk, et al., “Disorders of Extreme Stress: The Empirical Foundation of a
Complex Adaptation to T rauma,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  18 ,  no. 5 (2005): 389–99. See
also J. L. Herman, “Complex PTSD: A Syndrome in Survivors of Prolonged and Repeated
T rauma,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  5 ,  no. 3 (1992): 377–91; C. Zlotnick, et al., “The Long-
T erm Sequelae of Sexual Abuse: Support for a Complex Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Journal
of T raumatic Str ess  9 ,  no. 2 (1996): 195–205; S. Roth, et al., “Complex PTSD in V ictimsExposed to Sexual and Physical Abuse: Results from the DSM‐IV Field T rial for Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder ,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  10 ,  no. 4 (1997): 539–55; and D. Pelcovitz, et al.,
“Development and V alidation of the Structured Interview for Measurement of Disorders of
Extreme Stress,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  10  (1997) : 3–16.
12 . B. C. Stolbach, et al., “Complex T rauma Exposure and Symptoms in Urban T raumatized
Children: A Preliminary T est of Proposed Criteria for Developmental T rauma Disorder ,”
Journal of T raumatic Str ess  26, no. 4 (August 2013): 483–91.
13 . B. A. van der Kolk, et al., “Dissociation, Somatization and Af fect Dysregulation: The
Complexity of Adaptation to T rauma,” American Journal of Psychiatry  153, suppl (1996): 83–
93. See also D. G. Kilpatrick, et al., “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Field T rial: Evaluation of the
PTSD Construct—Criteria A Through E,” in: DSM-IV Sour cebook , vol. 4 (W ashington:
American Psychiatric Press, 1998), 803-844; T . Luxenber g, J. Spinazzola, and B. A. van der
Kolk, “Complex T rauma and Disorders of Extreme Stress (DESNOS) Diagnosis, Part One:
Assessment,” Dir ections in Psychiatry  21, no. 25 (2001): 373–92; and B. A. van der Kolk, et al.,
“Disorders of Extreme Stress: The Empirical Foundation of a Compex Adaptation to T rauma,”
Journal of T raumatic Str ess  18, no. 5 (2005): 389–99.
14 . These questions are available on the ACE W eb site: http://acestudy .or g/.
15 . http://www .cdc.gov/ace/findings.htm; http://acestudy .or g/download; V . Felitti, et al.,
“Relationship of Childhood Abuse and Household Dysfunction to Many of the Leading Causes
of Death in Adults: The Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study ,” American Journal of
Pr eventive Medicine  14 ,  no. 4 (1998): 245–58. See also R. Reading, “The Enduring Ef fects of
Abuse and Related Adverse Experiences in Childhood: A Conver gence of Evidence from
Neurobiology and Epidemiology ,” Child: Car e, Health and Development  32 ,  no. 2 (2006): 253–
56; V . J. Edwards, et al., “Experiencing Multiple Forms of Childhood Maltreatment and Adult
Mental Health: Results from the Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) Study ,” American
Journal of Psychiatry  160 ,  no. 8 (2003): 1453–60; S. R. Dube, et al., “Adverse Childhood
Experiences and Personal Alcohol Abuse as an Adult,” Addictive Behaviors  27 ,  no. 5 (2002):
713–25; S. R. and S. R. Dube, et al., “Childhood Abuse, Neglect, and Household Dysfunction
and the Risk of Illicit Drug Use: The Adverse Childhood Experiences Study ,” Pediatrics  1 1 1 ,
no. 3 (2003): 564–72.
16 . S. A. Strassels, “Economic Burden of Prescription Opioid Misuse and Abuse,” Journal of
Managed Car e Pharmacy 15, no. 7 (2009): 556–62.
17 . C. B. Nemerof f, et al., “Dif ferential Responses to Psychotherapy V ersus Pharmacotherapy in
Patients with Chronic Forms of Major Depression and Childhood T rauma,” Pr oceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  100 ,  no. 24 (2003): 14293–96.
See also C. Heim, P . M. Plotsky , and C. B. Nemerof f, “Importance of Studying the
Contributions of Early Adverse Experience to Neurobiological Findings in Depression,”
Neur opsychopharmacology  29 ,  no. 4 (2004): 641–48.
18 . B. E. Carlson, “Adolescent Observers of Marital V iolence,” Journal of Family V iolence  5, no.
4 (1990): 285–99. See also B. E. Carlson, “Children’ s Observations of Interparental V iolence,”
in Batter ed W omen and Their Families , ed. A. R. Roberts (New Y ork: Springer , 1984), 147–67;
J. L. Edleson, “Children’ s W itnessing of Adult Domestic V iolence,” Journal of Interpersonal
V iolence  14, no. 8 (1999): 839–70; K. Henning, et al., “Long-T erm Psychological and Social
Impact of W itnessing Physical Conflict Between Parents,” Journal of Interpersonal V iolence 1 1,
no. 1 (1996): 35–51; E. N. Jouriles, C. M. Murphy , and D. O’Leary , “Interpersonal Aggression,
Marital Discord, and Child Problems,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  57, no. 3
(1989): 453–55; J. R. Kolko, E. H. Blakely , and D. Engelman, “Children Who W itness
Domestic V iolence: A Review of Empirical Literature,” Journal of Interpersonal V iolence  1 1,no. 2 (1996): 281–93; and J. W olak and D. Finkelhor , “Children Exposed to Partner V iolence,”
in Partner V iolence: A Compr ehensive Review of 20 Y ears of Resear ch , ed. J. L. Jasinski and L.
W illiams (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1998).
19 . Most of these statements are based on conversations with V incent Felitti, amplified by J. E.
Stevens, “The Adverse Childhood Experiences Study—the Lar gest Public Health Study Y ou
Never Heard Of,” Huffington Post , October 8, 2012, http://www .huf fingtonpost.com/jane-ellen-
stevens/the-adverse-childhood-exp _1_b_1943647.html.
20 . Population attributable risk: the proportion of a problem in the overall population whose
problems can be attributed to specific risk factors.
21 . National Cancer Institute, “Nearly 800,000 Deaths Prevented Due to Declines in Smoking”
(press release), March 14, 2012, available at
http://www .cancer .gov/newscenter/newsfromnci/2012/T obaccoControlCISNET .
CHAPTER 10: DEVELOPMENT AL TRAUMA: THE HIDDEN EPIDEMIC
1 . These cases were part of the DTD field trial, conducted jointly by Julian Ford, Joseph
Spinazzola, and me.
2 . H. J. W illiams, M. J. Owen, and M. C. O’Donovan, “Schizophrenia Genetics: New Insights
from New Approaches,” British Medical Bulletin  91 (2009): 61–74. See also P . V . Gejman, A.
R. Sanders, and K. S. Kendler , “Genetics of Schizophrenia: New Findings and Challenges,”
Annual Review of Genomics and Human Genetics  12 (201 1): 121–44; and A. Sanders, et al.,
“No Significant Association of 14 Candidate Genes with Schizophrenia in a Lar ge European
Ancestry Sample: Implications for Psychiatric Genetics,” American Journal of Psychiatry  165,
no. 4 (April 2008): 497–506.
3 . R. Y ehuda, et al., “Putative Biological Mechanisms for the Association Between Early Life
Adversity and the Subsequent Development of PTSD,” Psychopharmacology  212, no. 3
(October 2010): 405–417; K. C. Koenen, “Genetics of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Review
and Recommendations for Future Studies,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  20, no. 5 (October
2007): 737–50; M. W . Gilbertson, et al., “Smaller Hippocampal V olume Predicts Pathologic
V ulnerability to Psychological T rauma,” Natur e Neur oscience  5 (2002): 1242–47.
4 . Koenen, “Genetics of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder .” See also R. F . P . Broekman, M. Olf f, and
F . Boer , “The Genetic Background to PTSD,” Neur oscience & Biobehavioral Reviews  31, no. 3
(2007): 348–62.
5 . M. J. Meaney and A. C. Fer guson-Smith, “Epigenetic Regulation of the Neural T ranscriptome:
The Meaning of the Marks,” Natur e Neur oscience  13 ,  no. 1 1 (2010): 1313–18. See also M. J.
Meaney , “Epigenetics and the Biological Definition of Gene × Environment Interactions,” Child
Development  81 ,  no. 1 (2010): 41–79; and B. M. Lester , et al., “Behavioral Epigenetics,” Annals
of the New Y ork Academy of Sciences  1226 ,  no. 1 (201 1): 14–33.
6 . M. Szyf, “The Early Life Social Environment and DNA Methylation: DNA Methylation
Mediating the Long-T erm Impact of Social Environments Early in Life,” Epigenetics  6, no. 8
(201 1): 971–78.
7 . Moshe Szyf, Patrick McGowan, and Michael J. Meaney , “The Social Environment and the
Epigenome,” Envir onmental and Molecular Mutagenesis 49, no. 1 (2008): 46–60.
8 . There now is voluminous evidence that life experiences of all sorts changes gene expression.
Some examples are: D. Mehta et al., “Childhood Maltreatment Is Associated with Distinct
Genomic and Epigenetic Profiles in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Pr oceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America  1 10, no. 20 (2013): 8302–7; P . O.
McGowan, et al., “Epigenetic Regulation of the Glucocorticoid Receptor in Human BrainAssociates with Childhood Abuse,” Natur e Neur oscience  12, no. 3 (2009): 342–48; M. N.
Davies, et al., “Functional Annotation of the Human Brain Methylome Identifies T issue-
Specific Epigenetic V ariation Across Brain and Blood,” Genome Biology  13, no. 6 (2012): R43;
M. Gunnar and K. Quevedo, “The Neurobiology of Stress and Development,” Annual Review of
Psychology  58 (2007): 145–73; A. Sommershof, et al., “Substantial Reduction of Naïve and
Regulatory T Cells Following T raumatic Stress,” Brain, Behavior , and Immunity  23, no. 8
(2009): 1 1 17–24; N. Provençal, et al., “The Signature of Maternal Rearing in the Methylome in
Rhesus Macaque Prefrontal Cortex and T Cells,” Journal of Neur oscience  32, no. 44 (2012):
15626–42; B. Labonté, et al., “Genome-wide Epigenetic Regulation by Early-Life T rauma,”
Ar chives of General Psychiatry  69, no. 7 (2012): 722–31; A. K. Smith, et al., “Dif ferential
Immune System DNA Methylation and Cytokine Regulation in Post-traumatic Stress Disorder ,”
American Journal of Medical Genetics Part B: Neur opsychiatric Genetics  156B, no. 6 (201 1):
700–708; M. Uddin, et al., “Epigenetic and Immune Function Profiles Associated with
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Pr oceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America  107, no. 20 (2010): 9470–75.
9 . C. S. Barr , et al., “The Utility of the Non‐human Primate Model for Studying Gene by
Environment Interactions in Behavioral Research,” Genes, Brain and Behavior  2 ,  no. 6 (2003):
336–40.
10 . A. J. Bennett, et al., “Early Experience and Serotonin T ransporter Gene V ariation Interact to
Influence Primate CNS Function,” Molecular Psychiatry  7 ,  no. 1 (2002): 1 18–22. See also C. S.
Barr , et al., “Interaction Between Serotonin T ransporter Gene V ariation and Rearing Condition
in Alcohol Preference and Consumption in Female Primates,” Ar chives of General Psychiatry
61 , no. 1 1 (2004): 1 146; and C. S. Barr , et al., “Serotonin T ransporter Gene V ariation Is
Associated with Alcohol Sensitivity in Rhesus Macaques Exposed to Early‐Life Stress,”
Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Resear ch  27 ,  no. 5 (2003): 812–17.
1 1 . A. Roy , et al., “Interaction of FKBP5, a Stress-Related Gene, with Childhood T rauma
Increases the Risk for Attempting Suicide,” Neur opsychopharmacology  35 ,  no. 8 (2010): 1674–
83. See also M. A. Enoch, et al., “The Influence of GABRA2, Childhood T rauma, and Their
Interaction on Alcohol, Heroin, and Cocaine Dependence,” Biological Psychiatry  67 no. 1
(2010): 20–27; and A. Roy , et al., “T wo HP A Axis Genes, CRHBP and FKBP5, Interact with
Childhood T rauma to Increase the Risk for Suicidal Behavior ,” Journal of Psychiatric Resear ch
46 ,  no. 1 (2012): 72–79.
12 . A. S. Masten and D. Cicchetti, “Developmental Cascades,” Development and Psychopathology
22 ,  no. 3 (2010): 491–95; S. L. T oth, et al., “Illogical Thinking and Thought Disorder in
Maltreated Children,” Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry  50 ,
no. 7 (201 1): 659–68; J. W illis, “Building a Bridge from Neuroscience to the Classroom,” Phi
Delta Kappan  89 ,  no. 6 (2008): 424; I. M. Eigsti and D. Cicchetti, “The Impact of Child
Maltreatment on Expressive Syntax at 60 Months,” Developmental Science  7 ,  no. 1 (2004): 88–
102.
13 . J. Spinazzola, et al., “Survey Evaluates Complex T rauma Exposure, Outcome, and Intervention
Among Children and Adolescents,” Psychiatric Annals 35, no. 5 (2005): 433–39.
14 . R. C. Kessler , C. B. Nelson, and K. A. McGonagle, “The Epidemiology of Co-occuring
Addictive and Mental Disorders,” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry  66, no. 1 (1996): 17–
31. See also Institute of Medicine of the National Academies, T r eatment of Posttraumatic Str ess
Disor der  (W ashington: National Academies Press, 2008); and C. S. North, et al., “T oward
V alidation of the Diagnosis of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” American Journal of Psychiatry
166, no. 1 (2009): 34–40.15 . Joseph Spinazzola, et al., “Survey Evaluates Complex T rauma Exposure, Outcome, and
Intervention Among Children and Adolescents,” Psychiatric Annals  (2005).
16 . Our work group consisted of Drs. Bob Pynoos, Frank Putnam, Glenn Saxe, Julian Ford, Joseph
Spinazzola, Marylene Cloitre, Bradley Stolbach, Alexander McFarlane, Alicia Lieberman,
W endy D’Andrea, Martin T eicher , and Dante Cicchetti.
17 . The proposed criteria for Developmental T rauma Disorder can be found in the Appendix.
18 . http://www .traumacenter .or g/products/instruments.php.
19 . Read more about Sroufe at www .cehd.umn.edu/icd/people/faculty/cpsy/sroufe.html and more
about the Minnesota Longitudinal Study of Risk and Adaptation and its publications at
http://www .cehd.umn.edu/icd/research/parent-child/ and
http://www .cehd.umn.edu/icd/research/parent-child/publications/. See also L. A. Sroufe and W .
A. Collins, The Development of the Person: The Minnesota Study of Risk and Adaptation fr om
Birth to Adulthood  (New Y ork: Guilford Press, 2009); and L. A. Sroufe, “Attachment and
Development: A Prospective, Longitudinal Study from Birth to Adulthood,” Attachment &
Human Development  7 ,  no. 4 (2005): 349–67.
20 . L. A. Sroufe, The Development of the Person: The Minnesota Study of Risk and Adaptation
fr om Birth to Adulthood  (New Y ork: Guilford Press, 2005). Harvard researcher Karlen L yons-
Ruth had similar findings in a sample of children she followed for about eighteen years:
Disor ganized attachment, role reversal, and lack of maternal communication at age three were
the greatest predictors of children being part of the mental health or social service system at age
eighteen.
21 . D. Jacobvitz and L. A. Sroufe, “The Early Caregiver -Child Relationship and Attention-Deficit
Disorder with Hyperactivity in Kinder garten: A Prospective Study ,” Child Development 58, no.
6 (December 1987): 1496–504.
22 . G. H. Elder Jr ., T . V an Nguyen, and A. Caspi, “Linking Family Hardship to Children’ s Lives,”
Child Development 56, no. 2 (April 1985): 361–75.
23 . For children who were physically abused, the chance of being diagnosed with conduct disorder
or oppositional defiant disorder went up by a factor of three. Neglect or sexual abuse doubled
the chance of developing an anxiety disorder . Parental psychological unavailability or sexual
abuse doubled the chance of later developing PTSD. The chance of receiving multiple diagnoses
was 54 percent for children who suf fered neglect, 60 percent for physical abuse, and 73 percent
for both sexual abuse.
24 . This was a quote based on the work of Emmy W erner , who has studied 698 children born on
the island of Kauai for forty years, starting in 1955. The study showed that most children who
grew up in unstable households grew up to experience problems with delinquency , mental and
physical health, and family stability . One-third of all high-risk children displayed resilience and
developed into caring, competent, and confident adults. Pr otective factors  were 1. being an
appealing child, 2. a strong bond with a nonparent caretaker (such as an aunt, a babysitter , or a
teacher) and strong involvement in church or community groups. E. E. W erner and R. S. Smith,
Over coming the Odds: High Risk Childr en fr om Birth to Adulthood  (Ithaca and London: Cornell
University Press, 1992).
25 . P . K. T rickett, J. G. Noll, and F . W . Putnam, “The Impact of Sexual Abuse on Female
Development: Lessons from a Multigenerational, Longitudinal Research Study ,” Development
and Psychopathology  23 (201 1): 453–76. See also J. G. Noll, P . K. T rickett, and F . W . Putnam,
“A Prospective Investigation of the Impact of Childhood Sexual Abuse on the Development of
Sexuality ,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  71 (2003): 575–86; P . K. T rickett, C.
McBride-Chang, and F . W . Putnam, “The Classroom Performance and Behavior of Sexually
Abused Females,” Development and Psychopathology  6 (1994): 183–94; P . K. T rickett and F .W . Putnam, Sexual Abuse of Females: Effects in Childhood  (W ashington: National Institute of
Mental Health, 1990–1993); F . W . Putnam and P . K. T rickett, The Psychobiological Effects of
Child Sexual Abuse  (New Y ork: W . T . Grant Foundation, 1987).
26 . In the sixty-three studies on disruptive mood regulation disorder , nobody asked anything about
attachment, PTSD, trauma, child abuse, or neglect. The word “maltreatment” is used in passing
in just one of the sixty-three articles. There is nothing about parenting, family dynamics, or
about family therapy .
27 . In the appendix at the back of the DSM, you can find the so-called V -codes, diagnostic labels
without of ficial standing that are not eligible for insurance reimbursement. There you will see
listings for childhood abuse, childhood neglect, childhood physical abuse, and childhood sexual
abuse.
28 . Ibid., p 121.
29 . At the time of this writing, the DSM-5 is number seven on Amazon’ s best-seller list. The AP A
earned $100 million on the previous edition of the DSM. The publication of the DSM
constitutes, with contributions from the pharmaceutical industry and membership dues, the
AP A ’ s major source of income.
30 . Gary Greenber g, The  Book of W oe: The DSM and the Unmaking of Psychiatry  (New Y ork:
Penguin, 2013), 239.
31 . In an open letter to the AP A David Elkins, the chairman of one of the divisions of the
American Psychological Association, complained that DSM-V was based on shaky evidence,
carelessness with the public health, and the conceptualizations of mental disorder as primarily
medical phenomena.” His letter attracted nearly five thousand signatures. The president of the
American Counseling Association sent a letter on behalf of its 1 15,000 DSM-buying members
to the president of the AP A, also objecting to the quality of the science behind DSM-5—and
“ur ge(d) the AP A to make public the work of the scientific review committee it had appointed to
review the proposed changes, as well as to allow an evaluation of “all evidence and data by
external, independent groups of experts.”
32 . Thomas Insel had formerly done research on the attachment hormone oxytocin in non-human
primates.
33 . National Institute of Mental Health, “NIMH Research Domain Criteria (RDoC),”
http://www .nimh.nih.gov/research-priorities/rdoc/nimh-research-domain-criteria-rdoc.shtml.
34 .  The Development of the Person: The Minnesota Study of Risk and Adaptation fr om Birth to
Adulthood  (New Y ork: Guilford Press, 2005).
35 . B. A. van der Kolk, “Developmental T rauma Disorder: T oward a Rational Diagnosis for
Children with Complex T rauma Histories,” Psychiatric Annals 35 ,  no. 5 (2005): 401–8; W .
D’Andrea, et al., “Understanding Interpersonal T rauma in Children: Why W e Need a
Developmentally Appropriate T rauma Diagnosis,” American Journal of Orthopsychiatry  82
(2012): 187–200. J. D. Ford, et al., “Clinical Significance of a Proposed Developmental T rauma
Disorder Diagnosis: Results of an International Survey of Clinicians,” Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry  74, no. 8 (2013): 841–849. Up-to-date results from the Developmental T rauma
Disorder field trial study are available on our W eb site: www .traumacenter .or g.
36 . J. J. Heckman, “Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged Children,”
Science  312 ,  no. 5782 (2006): 1900–2.
37 . D. Olds, et al., “Long-T erm Ef fects of Nurse Home V isitation on Children’ s Criminal and
Antisocial Behavior: 15-Y ear Follow-up of a Randomized Controlled T rial,” JAMA 280, no. 14
(1998): 1238–44. See also J. Eckenrode, et al., “Preventing Child Abuse and Neglect with a
Program of Nurse Home V isitation: The Limiting Ef fects of Domestic V iolence,” JAMA 284,
no. 1 1 (2000): 1385–91; D. I. Lowell, et al., “A Randomized Controlled T rial of Child FIRST : AComprehensive Home-Based Intervention T ranslating Research into Early Childhood Practice,”
Child Development  82, no. 1 (January/February 201 1): 193–208; S. T . Harvey and J. E. T aylor ,
“A Meta-Analysis of the Ef fects of Psychotherapy with Sexually Abused Children and
Adolescents, Clinical Psychology Review 30, no. 5 (July 2010): 517–35; J. E. T aylor and S. T .
Harvey , “A Meta-Analysis of the Ef fects of Psychotherapy with Adults Sexually Abused in
Childhood,” Clinical Psychology Review 30, no. 6 (August 2010): 749–67; Olds, Henderson,
Chamberlin, & T atelbaum, 1986; B. C. Stolbach, et al., “Complex T rauma Exposure and
Symptoms in Urban T raumatized Children: A Preliminary T est of Proposed Criteria for
Developmental T rauma Disorder ,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  26, no. 4 (August 2013): 483–
91.
CHAPTER 1 1: UNCOVERING SECRETS: THE PROBLEM OF TRAUMA TIC MEMOR Y
1 . Unlike clinical consultations, in which doctor -patient confidentiality applies, forensic
evaluations are public documents to be shared with lawyers, courts, and juries. Before doing a
forensic evaluation I inform clients of that and warn them that nothing they tell me can be kept
confidential.
2 . K. A. Lee, et al., “A 50-Y ear Prospective Study of the Psychological Sequelae of W orld W ar II
Combat,”  American Journal of Psychiatry 152, no. 4 (April 1995): 516–22 .
3 . J. L. McGaugh and M. L. Hertz, Memory Consolidation  (San Fransisco: Albion Press, 1972); L.
Cahill and J. L. McGaugh, “Mechanisms of Emotional Arousal and Lasting Declarative
Memory ,” T r ends in Neur osciences 21, no. 7 (1998): 294–99.
4 . A. F . Arnsten, et al., “α-1 Noradrener gic Receptor Stimulation Impairs Prefrontal Cortical
Cognitive Function,” Biological Psychiatry  45 ,  no. 1 (1999): 26–31. See also A. F . Arnsten,
“Enhanced: The Biology of Being Frazzled,” Science  280 ,  no. 5370 (1998): 171 1–12; S.
Birnbaum, et al., “A Role for Norepinephrine in Stress-Induced Cognitive Deficits: α-1-
adrenoceptor Mediation in the Prefrontal Cortex,” Biological Psychiatry 46, no. 9 (1999): 1266–
74.
5 . Y . D. V an Der W erf, et al. “Special Issue: Contributions of Thalamic Nuclei to Declarative
Memory Functioning,” Cortex  39 (2003): 1047–62. See also B. M. Elzinga and J. D. Bremner ,
“Are the Neural Substrates of Memory the Final Common Pathway in Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD)?” Journal of Affective Disor ders  70 (2002): 1–17; L. M. Shin et al., “A
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Study of Amygdala and Medial Prefrontal Cortex
Responses to Overtly Presented Fearful Faces in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Ar chives of
General Psychiatry  62 (2005): 273–81; L. M. W illiams et al., “T rauma Modulates Amygdala
and Medial Prefrontal Responses to Consciously Attended Fear ,” Neur oimage  29 (2006): 347–
57; R. A. Lanius et al., “Brain Activation During Script-Driven Imagery Induced Dissociative
Responses in PTSD: A Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Investigation,” Biological
Psychiatry  52 (2002): 305–31 1; H. D Critchley , C. J. Mathias, and R. J. Dolan, “Fear
Conditioning in Humans: The Influence of A wareness and Autonomic Arousal on Functional
Neuroanatomy ,” Neur on  33 (2002): 653–63; M. Beauregard, J. Levesque, and P . Bour gouin,
“Neural Correlates of Conscious Self-Regulation of Emotion,” Journal of Neur oscience 21
(2001): RC165; K. N. Ochsner et al., “For Better or for W orse: Neural Systems Supporting the
Cognitive Down- and Up-Regulation of Negative Emotion,” Neur oImage  23 (2004): 483–99;
M. A. Mor gan, L. M. Romanski, and J. E. LeDoux, et al., “Extinction of Emotional Learning:
Contribution of Medial Prefrontal Cortex,” Neur oscience Letters  163 (1993): 109–13; M. R.
Milad and G. J. Quirk, “Neurons in Medial Prefrontal Cortex Signal Memory for Fear
Extinction,” Natur e  420 (2002): 70–74; and J. Amat, et al., “Medial Prefrontal CortexDetermines How Stressor Controllability Af fects Behavior and Dorsal Raphe Nucleus,” Natur e
Neur oscience  8 (2005): 365–71.
6 . B. A. V an der Kolk and R. Fisler , “Dissociation and the Fragmentary Nature of T raumatic
Memories: Overview and Exploratory Study ,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  8, no. 4 (1995): 505–
25.
7 . Hysteria as defined by Free Dictionary , http://www .thefreedictionary .com/hysteria.
8 . A. Y oung, The Harmony of Illusions: Inventing Post-traumatic Str ess Disor der  (Princeton
University Press, 1997). See also H. F . Ellenber ger , The Discovery of the Unconscious: The
History and Evolution of Dynamic Psychiatry  (Basic Books, 2008).
9 . T . Ribot, Diseases of Memory  (Appleton, 1887), 108–9; Ellenber ger , Discovery of the
Unconscious .
10 . J. Breuer and S. Freud, “The Physical Mechanisms of Hysterical Phenomena,” in The  Standar d
Edition of the Complete Psychological W orks of Sigmund Fr eud  (London: Hogarth Press, 1893).
1 1 . A. Y oung, Harmony of Illusions .
12 . J. L. Herman, T rauma and Recovery  (New Y ork: Basic Books, 1997), 15.
13 . A. Y oung, Harmony of Illusions . See also J. M. Charcot, Clinical Lectur es on Certain Diseases
of the Nervous System,  vol. 3 (London: New Sydenham Society , 1888).
14 . http://en.wikipedia.or g/wiki/File:Jean-Martin_Charcot_chronophotography .jpg
15 . P . Janet, L ’Automatisme psychologique  (Paris: Félix Alcan, 1889).
16 . Onno van der Hart introduced me to the work of Janet and probably is the greatest living
scholar of his work. I had the good fortune of closely collaborating with Onno on summarizing
Janet’ s fundamental ideas. B. A. van der Kolk and O. van der Hart, “Pierre Janet and the
Breakdown of Adaptation in Psychological T rauma,” American Journal of Psychiatry  146
(1989): 1530–40; B. A. van der Kolk and O. van der Hart, “The Intrusive Past: The Flexibility
of Memory and the Engraving of T rauma,” Imago  48 (1991): 425–54.
17 . P . Janet, “L ’amnésie et la dissociation des souvenirs par l’emotion” [Amnesia and the
dissociation of memories by emotions], Journal de Psychologie  1 (1904): 417–53.
18 . P . Janet, Psychological Healing  (New Y ork: Macmillan, 1925); p 660.
19 . P . Janet, L ’Etat mental des hystériques , 2nd ed. (Paris: Félix Alcan, 191 1; repr . Marseille,
France: Lafitte Reprints, 1983). P . Janet, The Major Symptoms of Hysteria  (London and New
Y ork: Macmillan, 1907; repr . New Y ork: Hafner , 1965); P . Janet, L ’evolution de la memoir e et
de la notion du temps  (Paris: A. Chahine, 1928).
20 . J. L. T itchener , “Post-traumatic Decline: A Consequence of Unresolved Destructive Drives,”
T rauma and Its W ake  2  (1986): 5–19.
21 . J. Breuer , and S. Freud, “The Physical Mechanisms of Hysterical Phenomena.”
22 . S. Freud and J. Breuer , “The Etiology of Hysteria,” in the Standar d Edition of the Complete
Psychological W orks of Sigmund Fr eud , vol. 3, ed. J. Strachy (London: Hogarth Press, 1962):
189–221.
23 . S. Freud, “Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality ,” in the Standar d Edition of the Complete
Psychological W orks of Sigmund Fr eud , vol. 7 (London: Hogarth Press, 1962): 190: The
reappearance of sexual activity is determined by internal causes and external contingencies . . . I
shall have to speak presently of the internal causes; gr eat and lasting importance attaches at this
period to the accidental external [Freud’ s emphasis]  contingencies. In the for egr ound we find
the effects of seduction, which tr eats a child as a sexual object pr ematur ely  and teaches him, in
highly emotional circumstances, how to obtain satisfaction from his genital zones, a satisfaction
which he is then usually obliged to repeat again and again by masturbation. An influence of this
kind may originate either from adults or from other children. I cannot admit that in my paper on
‘The Aetiology of Hysteria’ (1896c) I exaggerated the fr equency or importance of that influence,though I did not then know that persons who remain normal may have had the same experiences
in their childhood, and though I consequently overrated the importance of seduction in
comparison with the factors of sexual constitution and development. Obviously seduction is not
required in order to arouse a child’ s sexual life; that can also come about spontaneously from
internal causes. S. Freud “Introductory Lectures in Psycho-analysis in Stand ar d Edition (1916),
370: Phantasies of being seduced are of particular interest, because so often they are not
phantasies but real memories.
24 . S. Freud, Inhibitions Symptoms and Anxiety  (1914), 150. See also Strachey , Standar d Edition
of the Complete Psychological W orks .
25 . B. A. van der Kolk, Psychological T rauma  (W ashington, D: American Psychiatric Press,
1986).
26 . B. A. V an der Kolk, “The Compulsion to Repeat the T rauma,” Psychiatric Clinics of North
America  12 ,  no. 2 (1989): 389–41 1.
CHAPTER 12: THE UNBEARABLE HEA VINESS OF REMEMBERING
1 . A . Y oung, The Harmony of Illusions: Inventing Post-traumatic Str ess Disor der (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1997), 84.
2 . F . W . Mott, “Special Discussion on Shell Shock W ithout V isible Signs of Injury ,” Pr oceedings
of the Royal Society of Medicine 9 (1916): i–xliv . See also C. S. Myers, “A Contribution to the
Study of Shell Shock,” Lancet  1 (1915): 316–20; T . W . Salmon, “The Care and T reatment of
Mental Diseases and W ar Neuroses (“Shell Shock”) in the British Army ,” Mental Hygiene  1
(1917): 509–47; and E. Jones and S. W essely , Shell  Shock to PTSD: Military Psychiatry fr om
1900 to the Gulf  (Hove, UK: Psychology Press, 2005).
3 . J. Keegan, The First W orld W ar  (New Y ork: Random House, 201 1).
4 . A. D. Macleod, “Shell Shock, Gordon Holmes and the Great W ar .” Journal of the Royal Society
of Medicine  97, no. 2 (2004): 86–89; M. Eckstein, Rites of Spring: The Gr eat W ar and the Birth
of the Modern Age  (Boston: Houghton Mif flin, 1989).
5 . Lord Southborough, Report of the W ar Office Committee of Enquiry into “Shell-Shock”
(London: His Majesty’ s Stationery Of fice, 1922).
6 . Booker Prize winner Pat Barker has written a moving trilogy about the work of army
psychiatrist W . H. R. Rivers: P . Barker , Regeneration  (London: Penguin UK, 2008); P . Barker ,
The Eye in the Door (New Y ork: Penguin, 1995); P . Barker , The Ghost Road (London: Penguin
UK, 2008). Further discussions of the aftermath of W orld W ar I can be found in  A. Y oung,
Harmony of Illusions; and  B. Shephar d, A W ar of Nerves, Soldiers and Psychiatrists 1914–1994
(London: Jonathan Cape, 2000).
7 . J. H. Bartlett, The Bonus Mar ch and the New Deal  (1937); R. Daniels, T he Bonus Mar ch: An
Episode of the Gr eat Depr ession  (1971).
8 . E. M. Remarque, All Quiet on the W estern Fr ont , trans. A. W . Wheen (London: GP Putnam’ s
Sons, 1929).
9 . Ibid., pp. 192–93.
10 . For an account, see http://motlc.wiesenthal.com/site/pp.asp?c=gvKVLcMVIuG&b=395007.
1 1 . C. S. Myers, Shell Shock in France 1914–1918 (Cambridge UK,  Cambridge University Press,
1940).
12 . A. Kardiner , The T raumatic Neur oses of W ar  (New Y ork: Hoeber , 1941).
13 . http://en.wikipedia.or g/wiki/Let_There_Be_Light_(film).
14 . G. Greer and J. Oxenbould, Daddy , W e Har dly Knew Y ou  (London: Penguin, 1990).
15 . A. Kardiner and H. Spiegel, W ar Str ess and Neur otic Illness  (Oxford, England: Hoeber , 1947).16 . D. J. Henderson, “Incest,” in Compr ehensive T extbook of Psychiatry , 2nd ed., eds. A. M.
Freedman and H. I. Kaplan (Baltimore: W illiams & W ilkins, 1974), p. 1536.
17 . W . Sar gent and E. Slater , “Acute W ar Neuroses,” The  Lancet 236, no. 6097 (1940): 1–2. See
also G. Debenham, et al., “T reatment of W ar Neurosis,” The  Lancet 237, no. 6126 (1941): 107–
9; and W . Sar gent and E. Slater , “Amnesic Syndromes in W ar ,” Pr oceedings of the Royal Society
of Medicine (Section of Psychiatry) 34, no. 12 (October 1941): 757–64.
18 . Every single scientific study of memory of childhood sexual abuse, whether prospective or
retrospective, whether studying clinical samples or general population samples, finds that a
certain percentage of sexually abused individuals for get, and later remember , their abuse. See,
e.g., B. A. van der Kolk and R. Fisler , “Dissociation and the Fragmentary Nature of T raumatic
Memories: Overview and Exploratory Study ,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  8 (1995): 505–25; J.
W . Hopper and B. A. van der Kolk, “Retrieving, Assessing, and Classifying T raumatic
Memories: A Preliminary Report on Three Case Studies of a New Standardized Method,”
Journal of Aggr ession, Maltr eatment & T rauma  4 (2001): 33–71; J. J. Freyd and A. P . DePrince,
eds., T rauma and Cognitive Science  (Binghamton, NY : Haworth Press, 2001), 33–71; A. P .
DePrince and J. J. Freyd, “The Meeting of T rauma and Cognitive Science: Facing Challenges
and Creating Opportunities at the Crossroads,” Journal of Aggr ession, Maltr eatment & T rauma
4, no. 2 (2001): 1–8; D. Brown, A. W . Scheflin, and D. Corydon Hammond, Memory , T rauma
T r eatment and the Law  (New Y ork: Norton, 1997); K. Pope and L. Brown, Recover ed Memories
of Abuse: Assessment, Therapy , For ensics  (W ashington: American Psychological Association,
1996); and L. T err , Unchained Memories: T rue Stories of T raumatic Memories, Lost and Found
(New Y ork: Basic Books, 1994).
19 . E. F . Loftus, S. Polonsky , and M. T . Fullilove, “Memories of Childhood Sexual Abuse:
Remembering and Repressing,” Psychology of W omen Quarterly  18, no. 1 (1994): 67–84. L. M.
W illiams, “Recall of Childhood T rauma: A Prospective Study of W omen’ s Memories of Child
Sexual Abuse,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 62, no. 6 (1994): 1 167–76.
20 . L. M. W illiams, “Recall of Childhood T rauma.”
21 . L. M. W illiams, “Recovered Memories of Abuse in W omen with Documented Child Sexual
V ictimization Histories,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  8, no. 4 (1995): 649–73.
22 . The prominent neuroscientist Jaak Panksepp states in his most recent book: “Abundant
preclinical work with animal models has now shown that memories that are retrieved tend to
return to their memory banks with modifications.” J. Panksepp and L. Biven, The Ar chaeology
of Mind: Neur oevolutionary Origins of Human Emotions , Norton Series on Interpersonal
Neurobiology (New Y ork: WW Norton, 2012).
23 . E. F . Loftus, “The Reality of Repressed Memories,” American Psychologist  48 ,  no. 5 (1993):
518–37. See also E. F . Loftus and K. Ketcham, The Myth of Repr essed Memory: False
Memories and Allegations of Sexual Abuse (New Y ork: Macmillan, 1996).
24 . J. F . Kihlstrom, “The Cognitive Unconscious,” Science  237 ,  no. 4821 (1987): 1445–52.
25 . E. F . Loftus, “Planting Misinformation in the Human Mind: A 30-Y ear Investigation of the
Malleability of Memory ,” Learning & Memory  12 ,  no. 4 (2005): 361–66.
26 . B. A. V an der Kolk and R. Fisler , “Dissociation and the Fragmentary Nature of T raumatic
Memories: Overview and Exploratory Study ,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  8 ,  no. 4 (1995): 505–
25.
27 . W e will explore this further in chapter 14.
28 . L. L. Langer , Holocaust T estimonies: The Ruins of Memory  (New Haven: Y ale University
Press, 1991).
29 . Ibid., p.5.
30 . L. L. Langer , op cit., p. 21.31 . L. L. Langer , op cit., p. 34.
32 . J. Osterman and B. A. van der Kolk, “A wareness during Anaesthesia and Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder ,” General Hospital Psychiatry 20 (1998): 274-81. See also K. Kiviniemi, “Conscious
A wareness and Memory During General Anesthesia,” Journal of the American Association of
Nurse Anesthetists  62 (1994): 441–49; A. D. Macleod and E. Maycock, “A wareness During
Anaesthesia and Post T raumatic Stress Disorder ,” Anaesthesia and Intensive Car e  20 ,  no. 3
(1992) 378–82; F . Guerra, “A wareness and Recall: Neurological and Psychological
Complications of Sur gery and Anesthesia,” in International Anesthesiology Clinics , vol. 24.  ed.
B. T Hindman (Boston: Little Brown, 1986), 75–99; J. Eldor and D. Z. N. Frankel, “Intra-
anesthetic A wareness,” Resuscitation  21 (1991): 1 13–19; J. L. Breckenridge and A. R.
Aitkenhead, “A wareness During Anaesthesia: A Review ,” Annals of the Royal College of
Sur geons of England 65, no. 2 (1983), 93.
CHAPTER 13: HEALING FROM TRAUMA: OWNING YOUR SELF
1 . “Self-leadership” is the term used by Dick Schwartz in internal family system therapy , the topic
of chapter 17.
2 . The exceptions are Pesso’ s and Schwartz’ s work, detailed in chapters 17 and 18, which I
practice, and from which I have personally benefited, but which I have not studied scientifically
—at least not yet.
3 . A. F . Arnsten, “Enhanced: The Biology of Being Frazzled,” Science  280, no. 5370 (1998):
171 1–12; A. Arnsten, “Stress Signalling Pathways That Impair Prefrontal Cortex Structure and
Function,” Natur e Reviews Neur oscience  10, no. 6 (2009): 410–22.
4 . D. J. Siegel, The Mindful Therapist: A Clinician’ s Guide to Mindsight and Neural Integration
(New Y ork: WW Norton, 2010).
5 . J. E. LeDoux, “Emotion Circuits in the Brain,” Annual Review of Neur oscience 23, no. 1 (2000):
155–84. See also M. A. Mor gan, L. M. Romanski, and J. E. LeDoux, “Extinction of Emotional
Learning: Contribution of Medial Prefrontal Cortex,” Neur oscience Letters 163, no. 1 (1993):
109–1 13; and J. M. Moscarello and J. E. LeDoux, “Active A voidance Learning Requires
Prefrontal Suppression of Amygdala-Mediated Defensive Reactions,” Journal of Neur oscience
33, no. 9 (2013): 3815–23.
6 . S. W . Por ges, “Stress and Parasympathetic Control,” Str ess Science: Neur oendocrinology  306
(2010). See also S. W . Por ges, “Reciprocal Influences Between Body and Brain in the
Perception and Expression of Af fect,” in The Healing Power of Emotion: Affective
Neur oscience, Development & Clinical Practice , Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology
(New Y ork: WW Norton, 2009), 27.
7 . B. A. van der Kolk, et al., “Y oga As an Adjunctive T reatment for PTSD.” J ournal of Clinical
Psychiatry  75, no. 6 (June 2014): 559–65.
8 . Sebern F . Fisher , Neur ofeedback in the T r eatment of Developmental T rauma: Calming the Fear -
Driven Brain . (New Y ork: WW Norton & Company , 2014).
9 . R. P . Brown and P . L. Gerbar g, “Sudarshan Kriya Y ogic Breathing in the T reatment of Stress,
Anxiety , and Depression—Part II: Clinical Applications and Guidelines,” Journal of Alternative
& Complementary Medicine  1 1, no. 4 (2005): 71 1–17. See also C. L. Mandle, et al., “The
Ef ficacy of Relaxation Response Interventions with Adult Patients: A Review of the Literature,”
Journal of Car diovascular Nursing  10 (1996): 4–26; and M. Nakao, et al., “Anxiety Is a Good
Indicator for Somatic Symptom Reduction Through Behavioral Medicine Intervention in a
Mind/Body Medicine Clinic,” Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics  70 (2001): 50–57.10 . C. Hannaford, Smart Moves: Why Learning Is Not All in Y our Head  (Arlington, V A: Great
Ocean Publishers, 1995), 22207–3746.
1 1 . J. Kabat-Zinn, Full Catastr ophe Living: Using the W isdom of Y our Body and Mind to Face
Str ess, Pain, and Illnes s (New Y ork: Bantam Books, 2013). See also D. Fosha, D. J. Siegel, and
M. Solomon, eds., The Healing Power of Emotion: Affective Neur oscience, Development &
Clinical Practice , Norton Series on Interpersonal Neurobiology (New Y ork: WW Norton,
201 1); and B. A. van der Kolk, “Posttraumatic Therapy in the Age of Neuroscience,”
Psychoanalytic Dialogues  12, no. 3 (2002): 381–92.
12 . As we have seen in chapter 5, brain scans of people suf fering from PTSD show altered
activation in areas associated with the default network, which is involved with autobiographical
memory and a continuous sense of self.
13 . P . A. Levine, In an Unspoken V oice: How the Body Releases T rauma and Restor es Goodness
(Berkeley: North Atlantic, 2010).
14 . P . Ogden, T rauma and the Body  (New Y ork: Norton, 2009). See also A. Y . Shalev , “Measuring
Outcome in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  61, supp. 5 (2000):
33–42.
15 . I. Kabat-Zinn, Full Catastr ophe Living . p. xx
16 . S. G. Hofmann, et al., “The Ef fect of Mindfulness-Based Therapy on Anxiety and Depression:
A Meta-Analytic Review ,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  78, no.2 (2010):
169–83; J. D. T easdale, et al., “Prevention of Relapse/Recurrence in Major Depression by
Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy ,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 68
(2000): 615–23. See also Britta K. Hölzel, et al., “How Does Mindfulness Meditation W ork?
Proposing Mechanisms of Action from a Conceptual and Neural Perspective.” Perspectives on
Psychological Science  6, no. 6 (201 1): 537–59; and P . Grossman, et al., “Mindfulness-Based
Stress Reduction and Health Benefits: A Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Psychosomatic Resear ch
57, no. 1 (2004): 35–43.
17 . The brain circuits involved in mindfulness meditation have been well established, and improve
attention regulation and has a positive ef fect on the interference of emotional reactions with
attentional performance tasks. See L. E. Carlson, et al., “One Y ear Pre-Post Intervention Follow-
up of Psychological, Immune, Endocrine and Blood Pressure Outcomes of Mindfulness-Based
Stress Reduction (MBSR) in Breast and Prostate Cancer Outpatients,” Brain, Behavior , and
Immunity  21, no. 8 (2007): 1038–49; and R. J. Davidson, et al., “Alterations in Brain and
Immune Function Produced by Mindfulness Meditation,” Psychosomatic Medicine 65, no. 4
(2003): 564–70.
18 . Britta Hölzel and her colleagues have done extensive research on meditation and brain function
and have shown that it involves the dorsomedial PFC, ventrolateral PFC, and rostral anterior
congulate (ACC). See B. K. Hölzel, et al., “Stress Reduction Correlates with Structural Changes
in the Amygdala,” Social Cognitive and Affective Neur oscience  5 (2010): 1 1–17; B. K. Hölzel,
et al., “Mindfulness Practice Leads to Increases in Regional Brain Gray Matter Density ,”
Psychiatry Resear ch  191, no. 1 (201 1): 36–43; B. K. Hölzel, et al., “Investigation of
Mindfulness Meditation Practitioners with V oxel-Based Morphometry ,” Social Cognitive and
Affective Neur oscience  3, no. 1 (2008): 55–61; and B. K. Hölzel, et al., “Dif ferential
Engagement of Anterior Cingulate and Adjacent Medial Frontal Cortex in Adept Meditators and
Non-meditators,” Neur oscience Letters  421, no. 1 (2007): 16–21.
19 . The main brain structure involved in body awareness is the anterior insula. See A. D. Craig,
“Interoception: The Sense of the Physiological Condition of the Body ,” Curr ent Opinion on
Neur obiology  13 (2003): 500–505; Critchley , W iens, Rotshtein, Ohman, and Dolan, 2004; N. A.
S Farb, Z. V . Segal, H. Mayber g, J. Bean, D. McKeon, Z. Fatima, et al., “Attending to thePresent: Mindfulness Meditation Reveals Distinct Neural Modes of Self-Reference,” Social
Cognitive and Affective Neur oscience 2 (2007): 313–22.; J. A. Grant, J. Courtemanche, E. G.
Duerden, G. H. Duncan, and P . Rainville, (2010). “Cortical Thickness and Pain Sensitivity in
Zen Meditators,” Emotion  10, no. 1 (2010): 43–53.
20 . S. J. Banks, et al., “Amygdala-Frontal Connectivity During Emotion-Regulation,” Social
Cognitive and Affective Neur oscience  2, no. 4 (2007): 303–12. See also M. R. Milad, et al.,
“Thickness of V entromedial Prefrontal Cortex in Humans Is Correlated with Extinction
Memory ,” Pr oceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
102, no. 30 (2005): 10706–1 1; and S. L. Rauch, L. M. Shin, and E. A. Phelps, “Neurocircuitry
Models of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Extinction: Human Neuroimaging Research—Past,
Present, and Future,” Biological Psychiatry  60, no. 4 (2006): 376–82.
21 . A. Freud and D. T . Burlingham. W ar and Childr en  (New Y ork University Press,  1943).
22 . There are three dif ferent ways in which people deal with overwhelming experiences:
dissociation (spacing out, shutting down), depersonalization (feeling like it’ s not you it’ s
happening to), and derealization (feeling like whatever is happening is not real).
23 . My colleagues at the Justice Resource Institute created a residential treatment program for
adolescents, The van der Kolk Center at Glenhaven Academy , that implements many of the
trauma-informed treatments discussed in this book, including yoga, sensory integration,
neurofeedback and theater . http://www .jri.or g/vanderkolk/about. The overarching treatment
model, attachment, self-regulation, and competency (ARC), was developed by my colleagues
Mar garet Blaustein and Kristine Kinnebur gh. Mar garet E. Blaustein, and Kristine M.
Kinnibur gh, T r eating T raumatic Str ess in Childr en and Adolescents: How to Foster Resilience
Thr ough Attachment, Self-Regulation, and Competency  (New Y ork: Guilford Press, 2012).
24 . C. K. Chandler , Animal Assisted Therapy in Counseling  (New Y ork: Routledge, 201 1). See
also A. J. Cleveland, “Therapy Dogs and the Dissociative Patient: Preliminary Observations,”
Dissociation  8, no. 4 (1995): 247–52; and A. Fine, Handbook on Animal Assisted Therapy:
Theor etical Foundations and Guidelines for Practice  (San Diego: Academic Press, 2010).
25 . E. W arner , et al., “Can the Body Change the Score? Application of Sensory Modulation
Principles in the T reatment of T raumatized Adolescents in Residential Settings,” Journal of
Family V iolence 28, no. 7 (2013): 729–38. See also A. J. A yres, Sensory Integration and
Learning Disor ders  (Los Angeles: W estern Psychological Services, 1972); H. Hodgdon, et al.,
“Development and Implementation of T rauma-Informed Programming in Residential Schools
Using the ARC Framework,” Journal of Family V iolence  27, no. 8 (2013); J. LeBel, et al.,
“Integrating Sensory and T rauma-Informed Interventions: A Massachusetts State Initiative, Part
1,” Mental Health Special Inter est Section Quarterly  33, no. 1 (2010): 1–4;
26 . They appeared to have activated the vestibule-cerebellar system in the brain, which seems to
be involved in self-regulation and can be damaged by early neglect.
27 . Aaron R. L yon and Karen S. Budd, “A Community Mental Health Implementation of Parent–
Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT).” Journal of Child and Family Studies  19, no. 5 (2010): 654–
68. See also Anthony J. Urquiza and Cheryl Bodiford McNeil, “Parent-Child Interaction
Therapy: An Intensive Dyadic Intervention for Physically Abusive Families.” Child
Maltr eatment  1, no 2 (1996): 134–44; J. Borrego Jr ., et al. “Research Publications.” Child and
Family Behavior Therapy  20: 27-54.
28 . B. A. van der Kolk, et al., “Fluoxetine in Post T raumatic Stress,” Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry  (1994): 517–22.
29 . P . Ogden, K. Minton, and C. Pain ,  T rauma and the Body (New Y ork, Norton, 2010) ; P . Ogden
and J. Fisher , Sensorimotor Psychotherapy: Interventions for T rauma and Attachment (New
Y ork: Norton, 2014).30 . P . Levine, In an Unspoken V oice  (Berkeley: North Atlantic Books); P . Levine, W aking the T iger
(Berkeley: North Atlantic Books).
31 . For more on impact model mugging, see http://modelmugging.or g/.
32 . S. Freud, Remembering, Repeating, and W orking Thr ough (Further Recommendations on the
T echnique of Psychoanalysis II) , standard ed. (London: Hogarth Press, 1914), p. 371
33 . E. Santini, R. U. Muller , and G. J. Quirk, “Consolidation of Extinction Learning Involves
T ransfer from NMDA-Independent to NMDA-Dependent Memory ,” Journal of Neur oscience
21 (2001): 9009–17.
34 . E. B. Foa and M. J. Kozak, “Emotional Processing of Fear: Exposure to Corrective
Information,” Psychological Bulletin  99 ,  no. 1 (1986): 20–35.
35 . C. R. Brewin, “Implications for Psychological Intervention,” in Neur opsychology of PTSD:
Biological, Cognitive, and Clinical Perspectives , ed. J. J. V asterling and C. R. Brewin (New
Y ork: Guilford, 2005), 272.
36 . T . M. Keane, “The Role of Exposure Therapy in the Psychological T reatment of PTSD,”
National Center for PTSD Clinical Quarterly  5, no. 4 (1995): 1–6.
37 . E. B. Foa and R. J. McNally , “Mechanisms of Change in Exposure Therapy ,” in Curr ent
Contr oversies in the Anxiety Disor ders , ed. R. M. Rapee (New Y ork: Guilford, 1996), 329–43.
38 . J. D. Ford and P . Kidd, “Early Childhood T rauma and Disorders of Extreme Stress as
Predictors of T reatment Outcome with Chronic PTSD,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess 18 (1998):
743–61. See also A. McDonagh-Coyle, et al., “Randomized T rial of Cognitive-Behavioral
Therapy for Chronic Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in Adult Female Survivors of Childhood
Sexual Abuse,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  73, no. 3 (2005): 515–24;
Institute of Medicine of the National Academies, T r eatment of Posttraumatic Str ess Disor der:
An Assessment of the Evidence (W ashington: National Academies Press, 2008); and R. Bradley ,
et al., “A Multidimensional Meta-Analysis of Psychotherapy for PTSD,” American Journal of
Psychiatry  162, no. 2 (2005): 214–27.
39 . J. Bisson, et al., “Psychological T reatments for Chronic Posttraumatic Stress Disorder:
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” British Journal of Psychiatry  190 (2007): 97–104. See
also L. H. Jaycox, E. B. Foa, and A. R. Morrall, “Influence of Emotional Engagement and
Habituation on Exposure Therapy for PTSD,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
66 (1998): 185–92.
40 . “Dropouts: in prolonged exposure (n = 53 [38%]); in present-centered therapy (n = 30 [21%])
(P = .002). The control group also had a high rate of casualties: 2 nonsuicidal deaths, 9
psychiatric hospitalizations, and 3 suicide attempts.” P . P . Schnurr , et al., “Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in W omen,” JAMA  297 ,  no. 8 (2007): 820–30.
41 . R. Bradley , et al., “A Multidimensional Meta-Analysis of Psychotherapy for PTSD,” American
Journal of Psychiatry  162 ,  no. 2 (2005): 214–27.
42 . J. H. Jaycox and E. B. Foa, “Obstacles in Implementing Exposure Therapy for PTSD: Case
Discussions and Practical Solutions,” Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy  3, no. 3 (1996):
176–84. See also E. B. Foa, D. Hearst-Ikeda, and K. J. Perry , “Evaluation of a Brief Cognitive-
Behavioral Program for the Prevention of Chronic PTSD in Recent Assault V ictims,” Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology  63 (1995): 948–55.
43 . Alexander McFarlane personal communication.
44 . R. K. Pitman, et al., “Psychiatric Complications During Flooding Therapy for Posttraumatic
Stress Disorder ,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  52, no. 1 (January 1991): 17–20.
45 . Jean Decety , Kalina J. Michalska, and Katherine D. Kinzler , “The Contribution of Emotion and
Cognition to Moral Sensitivity: A Neurodevelopmental Study ,” Cerebral Cortex 22 no. 1 (2012):209–20; Jean Decety , C. Daniel Batson, “Neuroscience Approaches to Interpersonal
Sensitivity ,” 2, nos. 3-4 (2007).
46 . K. H. Seal, et al., “V A Mental Health Services Utilization in Iraq and Afghanistan V eterans in
the First Y ear of Receiving New Mental Health Diagnoses,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  23
(2010): 5–16.
47 . L. Jerome, “(+/-)-3,4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA, “Ecstasy”) Investigator ’ s
Brochure,” December 2007, available at
www .maps.or g/research/mdma/protocol/ib_mdma_new08.pdf (accessed August 16, 2012).
48 . John H. Krystal, et al. “Chronic 3, 4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA) use: ef fects
on mood and neuropsychological function?.” The American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse
18.3 (1992): 331-341.
49 . Mithoefer , Michael C., et al., “The safety and ef ficacy of±3, 4-
methylenedioxymethamphetamine-assisted psychotherapy in subjects with chronic, treatment-
resistant posttraumatic stress disorder: the first randomized controlled pilot study .” Journal of
Psychopharmacology  25.4 (201 1): 439-452; M. C. Mithoefer , et al., “Durability of Improvement
in Post-traumatic Stress Disorder Symptoms and Absence of Harmful Ef fects or Drug
Dependency after 3, 4-Methylenedioxymethamphetamine-Assisted Psychotherapy: A
Prospective Long-T erm Follow-up Study ,” Journal of Psychopharmacology  27 ,  no. 1 (2013):
28–39.
50 . J. D. Bremner , “Neurobiology of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder ,” in Posttraumatic Str ess
Disor der: A Critical Review , ed. R. S. R ynoos (Lutherville, MD: Sidran Press, 1994), 43–64.
51 . http://cdn.nextgov .com/nextgov/interstitial.html?
v=2.1.1&rf=http%3A%2F%2Fwww .nextgov .com%2Fhealth%2F201 1%2F01%2Fmilitarys-
drug-policy-threatens-troops-health-doctors-say%2F48321%2F .
52 . J. R. T . Davidson, “Drug Therapy of Post-traumatic Stress Disorder ,” British Journal of
Psychiatry  160 (1992): 309–314. See also R. Famularo, R. Kinscherf f, and T . Fenton,
“Propranolol T reatment for Childhood Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Acute T ype,” American
Journal of Disor ders of Childhood  142 (1988): 1244–47; F . A. Fesler , “V alproate in Combat-
Related Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  52 (1991): 361–64; B. H.
Herman, et al., “Naltrexone Decreases Self-Injurious Behavior ,” Annals of Neur ology 22 (1987):
530–34; and B. A. van der Kolk, et al., “Fluoxetine in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder .”
53 . B. V an der Kolk, et al., “A Randomized Clinical T rial of EMDR, Fluoxetine and Pill Placebo
in the T reatment of PTSD: T reatment Ef fects and Long-T erm Maintenance,” Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry 68 (2007): 37–46.
54 . R. A. Bryant, et al., “T reating Acute Stress Disorder: An Evaluation of Cognitive Behavior
Therapy and Supportive Counseling T echniques,” American Journal of Psychiatry  156, no. 1 1
(November 1999): 1780–86; N. P . Roberts et al., “Early Psychological Interventions to T reat
Acute T raumatic Stress Symptoms,” Cochran Database of Systematic Reviews 3 (March 2010).
55 . This includes the alpha 1  receptor antagonist prazosin, the alpha 2  receptor antagonist clonidine,
and the beta receptor antagonist propranolol. See M. J. Friedman and J. R. Davidson,
“Pharmacotherapy for PTSD,” in Handbook of PTSD: Science and Practice ,  ed. M. J. Friedman,
T . M. Keane, and P . A. Resick (New Y ork: Guilford Press, (2007), 376.
56 . M. A. Raskind, et al., “A Parallel Group Placebo Controlled Study of Prazosin for T rauma
Nightmares and Sleep Disturbance in Combat V eterans with Post-traumatic Stress Disorder ,”
Biological Psychiatry 61 ,  no. 8 (2007): 928–34. F . B. T aylor , et al., “Prazosin Ef fects on
Objective Sleep Measures and Clinical Symptoms in Civilian T rauma Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder: A Placebo-Controlled Study ,” Biological Psychiatry 63, no. 6 (2008): 629–32.57 . Lithium, lamotrigin, carbamazepine, divalproex, gabapentin, and topiramate may help to
control trauma-related aggression and irritability . V alproate has been shown to be ef fective in
several case reports with PTSD, including with military veteran patients with chronic PTSD.
Friedman and Davidson, “Pharmacotherapy for PTSD”; F . A. Fesler , “V alproate in Combat-
Related Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 52, no. 9 (1991): 361–64.
The following study showed a 37.4 percent reduction in PTSD S. Akuchekian and S. Amanat,
“The Comparison of T opiramate and Placebo in the T reatment of Posttraumatic Stress Disorder:
A Randomized, Double-Blind Study ,” Journal of Resear ch in Medical Sciences 9, no. 5 (2004):
240–44.
58 . G. Bartzokis, et al., “Adjunctive Risperidone in the T reatment of Chronic Combat-Related
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Biological Psychiatry 57, no. 5 (2005): 474–79. See also D. B.
Reich, et al., “A Preliminary Study of Risperidone in the T reatment of Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder Related to Childhood Abuse in W omen,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 65, no. 12
(2004): 1601–1606.
59 . The other methods include interventions that usually help traumatized individuals sleep, like
the antidepressant trazodone, binaural beat apps, light/sound machines like Proteus
(www .brainmachines.com), HR V monitors like hearthmath (http://www .heartmath.com/), and
iRest, an ef fective yoga-based intervention. (http://www .irest.us/)
60 . D. W ilson, “Child’ s Ordeal Shows Risks of Psychosis Drugs for Y oung,” New Y ork T imes ,
September 1, 2010, available at http://www .nytimes.com/2010/09/02/business/02kids.html?
pagewanted=all&_r=0.
61 . M. Olfson, et al., “National T rends in the Of fice-Based T reatment of Children, Adolescents,
and Adults with Antipsychotics,” Ar chives of General Psychiatry 69, no. 12 (2012): 1247–56.
62 . E. Harris, et al., “Perspectives on Systems of Care: Concurrent Mental Health Therapy Among
Medicaid-Enrolled Y ouths Starting Antipsychotic Medications,” FOCUS 10, no. 3 (2012): 401–
407.
63 . B. A. V an der Kolk, “The Body Keeps the Score: Memory and the Evolving Psychobiology of
Posttraumatic Stress,” Harvar d Review of Psychiatry  1, no. 5 (1994): 253–65.
64 . B. Brewin, “Mental Illness is the Leading Cause of Hospitalization for Active-Duty T roops,”
Nextgov .com, May 17, 2012, http://www .nextgov .com/health/2012/05/mental-illness-leading-
cause-hospitalization-active-duty-troops/55797/.
65 . Mental health drug expenditures, Department of V eterans af fairs.
http://www .veterans.senate.gov/imo/media/doc/For%20the%20Record%20-
%20CCHR%204.30.14.pdf.
CHAPTER 14: LANGUAGE: MIRACLE AND TYRANNY
1 . Dr . Spencer Eth to Bessel A. van der Kolk, March 2002.
2 . J. Breuer and S. Freud, “The Physical Mechanisms of Hysterical Phenomena,” in The Standar d
Edition of the Complete Psychological W orks of Sigmund Fr eud (London: Hogarth Press, 1893).
J. Breuer and S. Freud, Studies on Hysteria  (New Y ork: Basic Books, 2009).
3 . T . E. Lawrence, Seven Pillars of W isdom (New Y ork: Doubleday , 1935).
4 . E. B. Foa, et al., “The Posttraumatic Cognitions Inventory (PTCI): Development and
V alidation,” Psychological Assessment  1 1, no. 3 (1999): 303–314.
5 . K. Marlantes, What It Is Like to Go to W ar  (New Y ork: Grove Press, 201 1).
6 . Ibid., 1 14.
7 . Ibid., 129.8 . H. Keller , The W orld I Live In  (1908), ed. R. Shattuck (New Y ork: NYRB Classics, 2004). See
also R. Shattuck, “A W orld of W ords,” New Y ork Review of Books , February 26, 2004.
9 . H. Keller , The Story of My Life , ed. R. Shattuck and D. Herrmann (New Y ork: Norton, 2003).
10 . W . M. Kelley , et al., “Finding the Self? An Event-Related fMRI Study ,” Journal of Cognitive
Neur oscience 14, no. 5 (2002): 785–94. See also N. A. Farb, et al., “Attending to the Present:
Mindfulness Meditation Reveals Distinct Neural Modes of Self-Reference,” Social Cognitive
and Affective Neur oscience 2, no. 4 (2007): 313–22. P . M. Niedenthal, “Embodying Emotion,”
Science 316, no. 5827 (2007): 1002–1005; and J. M. Allman, “The Anterior Cingulate Cortex,”
Annals of the New Y ork Academy of Sciences 935, no. 1 (2001): 107–1 17.
1 1 . J. Kagan, dialogue with the Dalai Lama, Massachusetts Institute of T echnology , 2006.
http://www .mindandlife.or g/about/history/.
12 . A. Goldman and F . de V ignemont, “Is Social Cognition Embodied?” T r ends in Cognitive
Sciences 13, no. 4 (2009): 154–59. See also A. D. Craig, “How Do Y ou Feel—Now? The
Anterior Insula and Human A wareness,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10 (2009): 59–70; H. D.
Critchley , “Neural Mechanisms of Autonomic, Af fective, and Cognitive Integration,” Journal of
Comparative Neur ology 493, no. 1 (2005): 154–66; T . D. W ager , et al., “Prefrontal-Subcortical
Pathways Mediating Successful Emotion Regulation,” Neur on 59, no. 6 (2008): 1037–50; K. N.
Ochsner , et al., “Rethinking Feelings: An fMRI Study of the Cognitive Regulation of Emotion,”
Journal of Cognitive Neur oscience 14, no. 8 (2002): 1215–29; A. D’Ar gembeau, et al., “Self-
Reflection Across T ime: Cortical Midline Structures Dif ferentiate Between Present and Past
Selves,” Social Cognitive and Affective Neur oscience 3, no. 3 (2008): 244–52; Y . Ma, et al.,
“Sociocultural Patterning of Neural Activity During Self-Reflection,” Social Cognitive and
Affective Neur oscience  9, no. 1 (2014): 73–80; R. N. Spreng, R. A. Mar , and A. S. Kim, “The
Common Neural Basis of Autobiographical Memory , Prospection, Navigation, Theory of Mind,
and the Default Mode: A Quantitative Meta-Analysis,” Journal of Cognitive Neur oscience  21,
no. 3 (2009): 489–510; H. D. Critchley , “The Human Cortex Responds to an Interoceptive
Challenge,” Pr oceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
101, no. 17 (2004): 6333–34; and C. Lamm, C. D. Batson, and J. Decety , “The Neural Substrate
of Human Empathy: Ef fects of Perspective-T aking and Cognitive Appraisal,” Journal of
Cognitive Neur oscience 19, no. 1 (2007): 42–58.
13 . J. W . Pennebaker , Opening Up: The Healing Power of Expr essing Emotions  (New Y ork:
Guilford Press, 2012), 12.
14 . Ibid., p. 19.
15 . Ibid., p.35.
16 . Ibid., p. 50.
17 . J. W . Pennebaker , J. K. Kiecolt-Glaser , and R. Glaser , “Disclosure of T raumas and Immune
Function: Health Implications for Psychotherapy ,” Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 56, no. 2 (1988): 239–45.
18 . D. A. Harris, “Dance/Movement Therapy Approaches to Fostering Resilience and Recovery
Among African Adolescent T orture Survivors,” T ortur e  17, no. 2 (2007): 134–55; M. Bensimon,
D. Amir , and Y . W olf, “Drumming Through T rauma: Music Therapy with Post-traumatic
Soldiers,” Arts in Psychotherapy  35, no. 1 (2008): 34–48; M. W eltman, “Movement Therapy
with Children Who Have Been Sexually Abused,” American Journal of Dance Therapy  9 , no. 1
(1986): 47–66; H. Englund, “Death, T rauma and Ritual: Mozambican Refugees in Malawi,”
Social Science & Medicine  46, no. 9 (1998): 1 165–74; H. T ef feri, Building on T raditional
Strengths: The Unaccompanied Refugee Children from South Sudan (1996); D. T olfree,
Restoring Playfulness: Differ ent Appr oaches to Assisting Childr en Who Ar e Psychologically
Affected by W ar or Displacement  (Stockholm: Rädda Barnen, 1996), 158–73; N. Boothby ,“Mobilizing Communities to Meet the Psychosocial Needs of Children in W ar and Refugee
Crises,” in Minefields in Their Hearts: The Mental Health of Childr en in W ar and Communal
V iolence , ed. R. Apfel and B. Simon  (New Haven, Y ale Universit Press, 1996), 149–64; S.
Sandel, S. Chaiklin, and A. Lohn, Foundations of Dance/Movement Therapy: The Life and W ork
of Marian Chace  (Columbia, MD: American Dance Therapy Association, 1993); K. Callaghan,
“Movement Psychotherapy with Adult Survivors of Political T orture and Or ganized V iolence,”
Arts in Psychotherapy  20, no. 5 (1993): 41 1–21; A. E. L. Gray , “The Body Remembers: Dance
Movement Therapy with an Adult Survivor of T orture,” American Journal of Dance Therapy
23, no. 1 (2001): 29–43.
19 . A. M. Krantz, and J. W . Pennebaker , “Expressive Dance, W riting, T rauma, and Health: When
W ords Have a Body .” Whole Person Healthcar e  3 (2007): 201–29.
20 . P . Fussell, The Gr eat W ar and Modern Memory  (London: Oxford University Press, 1975).
21 . Theses findings have been replicated in the following studies: J. D. Bremner , “Does Stress
Damage the Brain?” Biological Psychiatry  45, no. 7 (1999): 797–805; I. Liberzon, et al., “Brain
Activation in PTSD in Response to T rauma-Related Stimuli,” Biological Psychiatry 45, no. 7
(1999): 817–26; L. M. Shin, et al., “V isual Imagery and Perception in Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder: A Positron Emission T omographic Investigation,” Ar chives of General Psychiatry  54,
no. 3 (1997): 233–41; L. M. Shin, et al., “Regional Cerebral Blood Flow During Script-Driven
Imagery in Childhood Sexual Abuse–Related PTSD: A PET Investigation,” American Journal
of Psychiatry  156, no. 4 (1999): 575–84.
22 . I am not sure if this term originated with me or with Peter Levine. I own a video where he
credits me, but most of what I have learned about pendulation I’ve learned from him.
23 . A small body of evidence of fers support for claims that exposure/acupoints stimulation yields
stronger outcomes and exposures strategies that incorporate conventional relaxation techniques.
(www .vetcases.com). D. Church, et al., “Single-Session Reduction of the Intensity of T raumatic
Memories in Abused Adolescents After EFT : A Randomized Controlled Pilot Study ,”
T raumatology 18, no. 3 (2012): 73–79; and D. Feinstein and D. Church, “Modulating Gene
Expression Through Psychotherapy: The Contribution of Noninvasive Somatic Interventions,”
Review of General Psychology  14, no. 4 (2010): 283–95.
24 . T . Gil, et al., “Cognitive Functioning in Post‐traumatic Stress Disorder ,” Journal of T raumatic
Str ess  3, no. 1 (1990): 29–45; J. J. V asterling, et al., “Attention, Learning, and Memory
Performances and Intellectual Resources in V ietnam V eterans: PTSD and No Disorder
Comparisons,” Neur opsychology 16 ,  no. 1 (2002): 5.
25 . In a neuroimaging study the PTSD subjects deactivated the speech area of their brain, Broca’ s
area, in response to neutral words. In other words: the decreased Broca’ s area functioning that
we had found in PTSD patients (see chapter 3) did not only occur in response to traumatic
memories; it also happened when they were asked to pay attention to neutral words. This means
that, as a group, traumatized patients have a harder time to articulate what they feel and think
about ordinary events. The PTSD group also had decreased activation of the medial prefrontal
cortex (mPFC), the frontal lobe area that, as we have seen, conveys awareness of one’ s self, and
dampens activation of the amygdala, the smoke detector . This made it harder for them to
suppress the brain’ s fear response in response to a simple language task and again, made it
harder to pay attention and go on with their lives. See: Moores, K. A., Clark, C. R., McFarlane,
A. C., Brown, G. C., Puce, A., & T aylor , D. J. (2008). Abnormal recruitment of working
memory updating networks during maintenance of trauma-neutral information in post-traumatic
stress disorder . Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging, 163(2), 156–170.
26 . J. Breuer and S. Freud, “The Physical Mechanisms of Hysterical Phenomena,” in The Standar d
Edition of the Complete Psychological W orks of Sigmund Fr eud (London: Hogarth Press, 1893).27 . D. L. Schacter , Sear ching for Memory  (New Y ork: Basic Books, 1996).
CHAPTER 15: LETTING GO OF THE P AST : EMDR
1 . F . Shapiro, EMDR: The Br eakthr ough Eye Movement Therapy for Over coming Anxiety , Str ess,
and T rauma  (New Y ork: Basic Books, 2004).
2 . B. A. van der Kolk, et al., “A Randomized Clinical T rial of Eye Movement Desensitization and
Reprocessing (EMDR), Fluoxetine, and Pill Placebo in the T reatment of Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder: T reatment Ef fects and Long-T erm Maintenance,” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  68 ,
no. 1 (2007): 37–46.
3 . J. G. Carlson, et al., “Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EDMR) T reatment for
Combat-Related Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess  1 1, no. 1 (1998):
3–24.
4 . J. D. Payne, et al., “Sleep Increases False Recall of Semantically Related W ords in the Deese-
Roediger -McDermott Memory T ask,” Sleep  29 (2006): A373.
5 . B. A. van der Kolk and C. P . Ducey , “The Psychological Processing of T raumatic Experience:
Rorschach Patterns in PTSD,” Journal of T raumatic Str ess 2, no. 3 (1989): 259–74.
6 . M. Jouvet, The Paradox of Sleep: The Story of Dr eaming , trans. Laurence Garey (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1999).
7 . R. Greenwald, “Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR): A New Kind of
Dreamwork?” Dr eaming 5, no. 1 (1995): 51–55.
8 . R. Cartwright, et al., “REM Sleep Reduction, Mood Regulation and Remission in Untreated
Depression,” Psychiatry Resear ch 121, no. 2 (2003): 159–67. See also R. Cartwright, et al.,
“Role of REM Sleep and Dream Af fect in Overnight Mood Regulation: A Study of Normal
V olunteers,” Psychiatry Resear ch  81, no. 1 (1998): 1–8.
9 . R. Greenber g, C. A. Pearlman, and D. Gampel, “W ar Neuroses and the Adaptive Function of
REM Sleep,” British Journal of Medical Psychology 45, no. 1 1972): 27–33. Ramon Greenber g
and Chester Pearlman, as well as our lab, found that traumatized veterans wake themselves up
as soon as they enter a REM period. While many traumatized individuals use alcohol to help
them sleep, they thereby keep themselves from the full benefits of dreaming (the integration and
transformation of memory) and thereby may contribute to preventing the resolution of their
PTSD.
10 . B. van der Kolk, et al., “Nightmares and T rauma: A Comparison of Nightmares After Combat
with Lifelong Nightmares in V eterans,” American Journal of Psychiatry 141, no. 2 (1984): 187–
90.
1 1 . N. Breslau, et al., “Sleep Disturbance and Psychiatric Disorders: A Longitudinal
Epidemiological Study of Y oung Adults,” Biological Psychiatry 39, no. 6 (1996): 41 1–18.
12 . R. Stickgold, et al., “Sleep-Induced Changes in Associative Memory ,” Journal of Cognitive
Neur oscience  1 1 ,  no. 2 (1999): 182–93. See also R. Stickgold, “Of Sleep, Memories and
T rauma,” Natur e Neur oscience  10, no. 5 (2007): 540–42; and B. Rasch, et al., “Odor Cues
During Slow-W ave Sleep Prompt Declarative Memory Consolidation,” Science 315, no. 5817
(2007): 1426–29.
13 . E. J. W amsley , et al., “Dreaming of a Learning T ask Is Associated with Enhanced Sleep-
Dependent Memory Consolidation,” Curr ent Biology  20, no. 9, (May 1 1, 2010): 850–55.
14 . R. Stickgold, “Sleep-Dependent Memory Consolidation,” Natur e  437 (2005): 1272–78.
15 . R. Stickgold, et al., “Sleep-Induced Changes in Associative Memory ,” Journal of Cognitive
Neur oscience  1 1, no. 2 (1999): 182–93.16 . J. W illiams, et al., “Bizarreness in Dreams and Fantasies: Implications for the Activation-
Synthesis Hypothesis,” Consciousness and Cognition 1, no. 2 (1992): 172–85. See also
Stickgold, et al., “Sleep-Induced Changes in Associative Memory .”
17 . M. P . W alker , et al., “Cognitive Flexibility Across the Sleep-W ake Cycle: REM-Sleep
Enhancement of Anagram Problem Solving,” Cognitive Brain Resear ch  14 (2002): 317–24.
18 . R. Stickgold, “EMDR: A Putative Neurobiological Mechanism of Action,” Journal of Clinical
Psychology  58 (2002): 61–75.
19 . There are several studies on how eye movements help to process and transform traumatic
memories. M. Sack, et al., “Alterations in Autonomic T one During T rauma Exposure Using Eye
Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR)—Results of a Preliminary
Investigation,” Journal of Anxiety Disor ders 22, no. 7 (2008): 1264–71; B. Letizia, F . Andrea,
and C. Paolo, Neuroanatomical Changes After Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing
(EMDR) T reatment in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder , The Journal of Neur opsychiatry and
Clinical Neur osciences, 19 , no. 4 (2007): 475–76; P . Levin, S. Lazrove, and B. van der Kolk,
(1999). What Psychological T esting and Neuroimaging T ell Us About the T reatment of
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder by Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing, Journal of
Anxiety Disor ders, 13, nos. 1–2, 159–72; M. L. Harper , T . Rasolkhani Kalhorn, J. F . Drozd, “On
the Neural Basis of EMDR Therapy: Insights from Qeeg Studies, T raumatology , 15, no. 2
(2009): 81–95; K. Lansing, D. G. Amen, C. Hanks, L. Rudy , “High-Resolution Brain SPECT
Imaging and Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing in Police Of ficers with PTSD,”
The Journal of Neur opsychiatry and Clinical Neur osciences 17, no. 4 (2005): 526–32; T .
Ohtani, K. Matsuo, K. Kasai, T . Kato, and N. Kato, “Hemodynamic Responses of Eye
Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder . Neur oscience
Resear ch,  65, no. 4 (2009): 375–83; M. Pagani, G. Högber g, D. Salmaso, D. Nardo, Ö. Sundin,
C. Jonsson, and T . Hällström, “Ef fects of EMDR Psychotherapy on 99 mtc-HMP AO Distribution
in Occupation-Related Post-T raumatic Stress Disorder ,” Nuclear Medicine Communications  28
(2007): 757–65; H. P . Sönder gaard and U. Elofsson, “Psychophysiological Studies of EMDR,”
Journal of EMDR Practice and Resear ch  2, no. 4  (2008): 282–88.
CHAPTER 16: LEARNING T O INHABIT YOUR BODY : YOGA
1 . Acupuncture and acupressure are widely practiced among trauma-oriented clinicians and is
beginning to be systematically studied as a treatment for clinical PTSD. M. Hollifield, et al.,
“Acupuncture for Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Randomized Controlled Pilot T rial,” Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease  195, no. 6 (2007): 504–513. Studies that use fMRI to measure
the ef fects of acupuncture on the areas of the brain associated with fear report acupuncture to
produce rapid regulation of these brain regions. K. K. Hui, et al., “The Integrated Response of
the Human Cerebro-Cerebellar and Limbic Systems to Acupuncture Stimulation at ST 36 as
Evidenced by fMRI,” Neur oImage  27 (2005): 479–96; J. Fang, et al., “The Salient
Characteristics of the Central Ef fects of Acupuncture Needling: Limbic-Paralimbic-Neocortical
Network Modulation,” Human Brain Mapping  30 (2009): 1 196–206. D. Feinstein, “Rapid
T reatment of PTSD: Why Psychological Exposure with Acupoint T apping May Be Ef fective,”
Psychotherapy: Theory , Resear ch, Practice, T raining  47, no. 3 (2010): 385–402; D. Church, et
al., “Psychological T rauma Symptom Improvement in V eterans Using EFT (Emotional Freedom
T echnique): A Randomized Controlled T rial,” Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease  201
(2013): 153–60; D. Church, G. Y ount, and A. J. Brooks, “The Ef fect of Emotional Freedom
T echniques (EFT) on Stress Biochemistry: A Randomized Controlled T rial,” Journal of Nervous
and Mental Disease  200 (2012): 891–96; R. P . Dhond, N. Kettner , and V . Napadow ,“Neuroimaging Acupuncture Ef fects in the Human Brain,” Journal of Alternative and
Complementary Medicine  13 (2007): 603–616; K. K. Hui, et al., “Acupuncture Modulates the
Limbic System and Subcortical Gray Structures of the Human Brain: Evidence from fMRI
Studies in Normal Subjects,” Human Brain Mapping 9 (2000): 13–25.
2 . M. Sack, J. W . Hopper , and F . Lamprecht, “Low Respiratory Sinus Arrhythmia and Prolonged
Psychophysiological Arousal in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: Heart Rate Dynamics and
Individual Dif ferences in Arousal Regulation,” Biological Psychiatry  55, no. 3 (2004): 284–90.
See also H. Cohen, et al., “Analysis of Heart Rate V ariability in Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Patients in Response to a T rauma-Related Reminder ,” Biological Psychiatry  44, no. 10 (1998):
1054–59; H. Cohen, et al., “Long-Lasting Behavioral Ef fects of Juvenile T rauma in an Animal
Model of PTSD Associated with a Failure of the Autonomic Nervous System to Recover ,”
Eur opean Neur opsychopharmacology  17, no. 6 (2007): 464–77; and H. W ahbeh and B. S. Oken,
“Peak High-Frequency HR V and Peak Alpha Frequency Higher in PTSD,” Applied
Psychophysiology and Biofeedback  38, no. 1 (2013): 57–69.
3 . J. W . Hopper , et al., “Preliminary Evidence of Parasympathetic Influence on Basal Heart Rate in
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder ,” Journal of Psychosomatic Resear ch 60, no. 1 (2006): 83–90.
4 . Arieh Shalev at Hadassah Medical School in Jerusalem and Roger Pitman’ s experiments at
Harvard also pointed in this direction: A. Y . Shalev , et al., “Auditory Startle Response in T rauma
Survivors with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A Prospective Study ,” American Journal of
Psychiatry  157 ,  no. 2 (2000): 255–61; R. K. Pitman, et al., “Psychophysiologic Assessment of
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Imagery in V ietnam Combat V eterans,” Ar chives of General
Psychiatry  44 ,  no. 1 1 (1987): 970–75; A. Y . Shalev , et al., “A Prospective Study of Heart Rate
Response Following T rauma and the Subsequent Development of Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder ,” Ar chives of General Psychiatry  55 ,  no. 6 (1998): 553–59.
5 . P . Lehrer , Y . Sasaki, and Y . Saito, “Zazen and Cardiac V ariability ,” Psychosomatic Medicine 61,
no. 6 (1999): 812–21. See also R. Sovik, “The Science of Breathing: The Y ogic V iew ,” Pr ogr ess
in Brain Resear ch 122 (1999): 491–505; P . Philippot, G. Chapelle, and S. Blairy , “Respiratory
Feedback in the Generation of Emotion,” Cognition & Emotion 16, no. 5 (2002): 605–627; A.
Michalsen, et al., “Rapid Stress Reduction and Anxiolysis Among Distressed W omen as a
Consequence of a Three-Month Intensive Y oga Program,” Medcal Science Monitor  1 1, no. 12
(2005): 555–61; G. Kirkwood et al., “Y oga for Anxiety: A Systematic Review of the Research
Evidence,” British Journal of Sports Medicine  39 (2005): 884–91; K. Pilkington, et al., “Y oga
for Depression: The Research Evidence,” Journal of Affective Disor ders  89 (2005): 13–24; and
P . Gerbar g and R. Brown, “Y oga: A Breath of Relief for Hurricane Katrina Refugees,” Curr ent
Psychiatry  4 (2005): 55–67.
6 . B. Cuthbert et al., “Strategies of Arousal Control: Biofeedback, Meditation, and Motivation,”
Journal of Experimental Psychology 1 10 (1981): 518–46. See also S. B. S. Khalsa, “Y oga as a
Therapeutic Intervention: A Bibliometric Analysis of Published Research Studies,” Indian
Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology  48 (2004): 269–85; M. M. Delmonte, “Meditation as
a Clinical Intervention Strategy: A Brief Review ,” International Journal of Psychosomatics  33
(1986): 9–12; I. Becker , “Uses of Y oga in Psychiatry and Medicine,” in Complementary and
Alternative Medicine and Psychiatry , vol. 19, ed. P . R. Muskin PR (W ashington: American
Psychiatric Press, 2008); L. Bernardi, et al., “Slow Breathing Reduces Chemoreflex Response to
Hypoxia and Hypercapnia, and Increases Baroreflex Sensitivity ,” Journal of Hypertension  19,
no. 12 (2001): 2221–29; R. P . Brown and P . L. Gerbar g, “Sudarshan Kriya Y ogic Breathing in
the T reatment of Stress, Anxiety , and Depression: Part I: Neurophysiologic Model,” Journal of
Alternative and Complementary Medicine  1 1 (2005): 189–201; R. P . Brown and P . L. Gerbar g,
“Sudarshan Kriya Y ogic Breathing in the T reatment of Stress, Anxiety , and Depression: Part II:Clinical Applications and Guidelines,” Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine  1 1
(2005): 71 1–17; C. C. Streeter , et al., “Y oga Asana Sessions Increase Brain GABA Levels: A
Pilot Study ,” Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine  13 (2007): 419–26; and C. C.
Streeter , et al., “Ef fects of Y oga V ersus W alking on Mood, Anxiety , and Brain GABA Levels: A
Randomized Controlled MRS Study ,” Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine  16
(2010): 1 145–52.
7 . There are dozens of scientific articles showing the positive ef fect of yoga for various medical
conditions. The following is a small sample: S. B. Khalsa, “Y oga as a Therapeutic Intervention”;
P . Grossman, et al., “Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction and Health Benefits: A Meta-
Analysis,” Journal of Psychosomatic Resear ch  57 (2004): 35–43; K. Sherman, et al.,
“Comparing Y oga, Exercise, and a Self-Care Book for Chronic Low Back Pain: A Randomized,
Controlled T rial,” Annals of Internal Medicine  143 (2005): 849–56; K. A. W illiams, et al.,
“Ef fect of Iyengar Y oga Therapy for Chronic Low Back Pain,” Pain  1 15 (2005): 107–1 17; R. B.
Saper , et al., “Y oga for Chronic Low Back Pain in a Predominantly Minority Population: A Pilot
Randomized Controlled T rial,” Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine  15 (2009): 18–27;
J. W . Carson, et al., “Y oga for W omen with Metastatic Breast Cancer: Results from a Pilot
Study ,” Journal of Pain and Symptom Management  33 (2007): 331–41.
8 . B. A. van der Kolk, et al., “Y oga as an Adjunctive Therapy for PTSD,” Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry  75, no. 6 (June 2014): 559–65.
9 . A California company , HeartMath, has developed nifty devices and computer games that are
both fun and ef fective in helping people to achieve better HR V . T o date nobody has studied
whether simple devices such as those developed by HeartMath can reduce PTSD symptoms, but
this very likely the case. (see in www .heartmath.or g.)
10 . As of this writing there are twenty-four apps available on iT unes that claim to be able to help
increase HR V , such as emW ave, HeartMath, and GPS4Soul.
1 1 . B. A. van der Kolk, “Clinical Implications of Neuroscience Research in PTSD,” Annals of the
New Y ork Academy of Sciences  1071, no. 1 (2006): 277–93.
12 . S. T elles, et al., “Alterations of Auditory Middle Latency Evoked Potentials During Y ogic
Consciously Regulated Breathing and Attentive State of Mind,” International Journal of
Psychophysiology  14, no. 3 (1993): 189–98. See also P . L. Gerbar g, “Y oga and Neuro-
Psychoanalysis,” in Bodies in T r eatment: The Unspoken Dimension , ed. Frances Sommer
Anderson (New Y ork, Analytic Press, 2008), 127–50.
13 . D. Emerson and E. Hopper , Over coming T rauma Thr ough Y oga: Reclaiming Y our Body
(Berkeley , North Atlantic Books, 201 1).
14 . A. Damasio, The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of
Consciousness  (New Y ork, Hartcourt, 1999).
15 . “Interoception” is the scientific name for this basic self-sensing ability . Brain-imaging studies
of traumatized people have repeatedly shown problems in the areas of the brain related to
physical self-awareness, particularly an area called the insula. J. W . Hopper , et al., “Neural
Correlates of Reexperiencing, A voidance, and Dissociation in PTSD: Symptom Dimensions and
Emotion Dysregulation in Responses to Script‐Driven T rauma Imagery ,” Journal of T raumatic
Str ess  20, no. 5 (2007): 713–25. See also I. A. Strigo, et al., “Neural Correlates of Altered Pain
Response in W omen with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder from Intimate Partner V iolence,”
Biological Psychiatry 68, no. 5 (2010): 442–50; G. A. Fonzo, et al., “Exaggerated and
Disconnected Insular -Amygdalar Blood Oxygenation Level-Dependent Response to Threat-
Related Emotional Faces in W omen with Intimate-Partner V iolence Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder ,” Biological Psychiatry  68, no. 5 (2010): 433–41; P . A. Frewen, et al., “Social
Emotions and Emotional V alence During Imagery in W omen with PTSD: Af fective and NeuralCorrelates,” Psychological T rauma: Theory , Resear ch, Practice, and Policy 2, no. 2 (2010):
145–57; K. Felmingham, et al., “Dissociative Responses to Conscious and Non-conscious Fear
Impact Underlying Brain Function in Post-traumatic Stress Disorder ,” Psychological Medicine
38, no. 12 (2008): 1771–80; A. N. Simmons, et al., “Functional Activation and Neural Networks
in W omen with Posttraumatic Stress Disorder Related to Intimate Partner V iolence,” Biological
Psychiatry 64, no. 8 (2008): 681–90; R. J. L. Lindauer , et al., “Ef fects of Psychotherapy on
Regional Cerebral Blood Flow During T rauma Imagery in Patients with Post-traumatic Stress
Disorder: A Randomized Clinical T rial,” Psychological Medicine  38, no. 4 (2008): 543–54 and
A. Etkin and T . D. W ager , “Functional Neuroimaging of Anxiety: A Meta-Analysis of
Emotional Processing in PTSD, Social Anxiety Disorder , and Specific Phobia,” American
Journal of Psychiatry 164, no. 10 (2007): 1476–88.
16 . J. C. Nemiah and P . E. Sifneos, “Psychosomatic Illness: A Problem in Communication,”
Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics  18, no. 1–6 (1970): 154–60. See also G. J. T aylor , R. M.
Bagby , and J. D. A. Parker , Disor ders of Affect Regulation: Alexithymia in Medical and
Psychiatric Illness  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
17 . A. R. Damásio, The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion and the Making of
Consciousness  (Random House, 2000), 28.
18 . B. A. van der Kolk, “Clinical Implications of Neuroscience Research in PTSD,” Annals of the
New Y ork Academy of Sciences 1071, no. 1 (2006): 277–93. See also B. K. Hölzel, et al., “How
Does Mindfulness Meditation W ork? Proposing Mechanisms of Action from a Conceptual and
Neural Perspective,” Perspectives on Psychological Science 6, no. 6 (201 1): 537–59.
19 . B. K. Hölzel, et al., “Mindfulness Practice Leads to Increases in Regional Brain Gray Matter
Density ,” Psychiatry Resear ch: Neur oimaging  191, no. 1 (201 1): 36–43. See also B. K. Hölzel,
et al., “Stress Reduction Correlates with Structural Changes in the Amygdala,” Social Cognitive
and Affective Neur oscience  5, no. 1 (2010): 1 1–17; and S. W . Lazar , et al., “Meditation
Experience Is Associated with Increased Cortical Thickness,” Neur oReport  16 (2005): 1893–97.
CHAPTER 17: PUTTING THE PIECES T OGETHER: SELF-LEADERSHIP
1 . R. A. Goulding and R. C. Schwartz, The Mosaic Mind: Empowering the T ormented Selves of
Child Abuse Survivors  (New Y ork: Norton, 1995), 4.
2 . J. G. W atkins and H. H. W atkins, Ego States  (New Y ork: Norton, 1997). Jung calls personality
parts archetypes and complexes; cognitive psychology schemes and the DID literature refers to
them as alters. See also J. G. W atkins and H. H. W atkins, “Theory and Practice of Ego State
Therapy: A Short-T erm Therapeutic Approach,” Short-T erm Appr oaches to Psychotherapy 3
(1979): 176–220; J. G. W atkins and H. H. W atkins, “Ego States and Hidden Observers,” Journal
of Alter ed States of Consciousness 5, no. 1 (1979): 3–18; and C. G. Jung, Lectur es: Psychology
and Religion  (New Haven CT : Y ale University Press, 1960).
3 . W . James, The Principles of Psychology  (New Y ork: Holt, 1890), 206.
4 . C. Jung, Collected W orks , vol. 9, The Ar chetypes and the Collective Unconscious  (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1955/1968), 330.
5 . C. Jung, Collected W orks , vol. 10, Civilization in T ransition  (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, 1957/1964), 540.
6 . Ibid., 133.
7 . M. S. Gazzaniga, The Social Brain: Discovering the Networks of the Mind (New Y ork: Basic
Books, 1985), 90.
8 . Ibid., 356.
9 . M, Minsky , The Society of Mind  (New Y ork: Simon & Schuster , 1988), 51.10 . Goulding and Schwartz, Mosaic Mind , p. 290.
1 1 . O. van der Hart, E. R. Nijenhuis, and K. Steele, The Haunted Self: Structural Dissociation and
the T r eatment of Chr onic T raumatization  (New Y ork: WW Norton, 2006); R. P . Kluft, Shelter
fr om the Storm  (self-published, 2013).
12 . R. Schwartz, Internal Family Systems Therapy  (New Y ork: Guilford Press, 1995).
13 . Ibid., p. 34.
14 . Ibid., p. 19.
15 . Goulding and Schwartz, Mosaic Mind , 63.
16 . J. G. W atkins, 1997, illustrates this as an example of personifying depression: “W e need to
know what the imaginal sense of the depression is and who, which character , suf fers it.”
17 . Richard Schwartz, personal communication.
18 . Goulding and Schwartz, Mosaic Mind , 33.
19 . A. W . Evers, et al., “T ailored Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy in Early Rheumatoid Arthritis for
Patients at Risk: A Randomized Controlled T rial,” Pain  100, no. 1–2 (2002): 141–53; E. K.
Pradhan, et al., “Ef fect of Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction in Rheumatoid Arthritis
Patients,” Arthritis & Rheumatology  57, no. 7 (2007): p. 1 134–42; J. M. Smyth, et al., “Ef fects
of W riting About Stressful Experiences on Symptom Reduction in Patients with Asthma or
Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Randomized T rial,” JAMA  281, no. 14 (1999): 1304–9; L. Sharpe, et
al., “Long-T erm Ef ficacy of a Cognitive Behavioural T reatment from a Randomized Controlled
T rial for Patients Recently Diagnosed with Rheumatoid Arthritis,” Rheumatology  (Oxfor d)  42,
no. 3 (2003): 435–41; H. A. Zangi, et al., “A Mindfulness-Based Group Intervention to Reduce
Psychological Distress and Fatigue in Patients with Inflammatory Rheumatic Joint Diseases: A
Randomised Controlled T rial,” Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases  71, no. 6 (2012): 91 1–17.
CHAPTER 18: FILLING IN THE HOLES: CREA TING STRUCTURES
1 . Pesso Boyden System Psychomotor . See http://pbsp.com/.
2 . D. Goleman, Social Intelligence: The New Science of Human Relationships  (Random House
Digital, 2006).
3 . A. Pesso, “PBSP: Pesso Boyden System Psychomotor ,” in Getting in T ouch: A Guide to Body-
Center ed Therapies, ed. S. Caldwell (Wheaton, IL: Theosophical Publishing House, 1997); A.
Pesso, Movement in Psychotherapy: Psychomotor T echniques and T raining ( New Y ork: New
Y ork University Press, 1969); A. Pesso, Experience in Action: A Psychomotor Psychology ( New
Y ork: New Y ork University Press, 1973); A. Pesso and J. Crandell, eds., Moving Psychotherapy:
Theory and Application of Pesso System/Psychomotor ( Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books,
1991); M. Scarf, Secr ets, Lies, and Betrayals (New Y ork: Ballantine Books, 2005); M. van
Attekum, Aan Den Lijve ( Netherlands:  Pearson Assessment, 2009); and A. Pesso, “The
Externalized Realization of the Unconscious and the Corrective Experience,” in Handbook of
Body-Psychotherapy / Handbuch der Körperpsychotherapie, ed. H. W eiss and G. Marlock
(Stuttgart,Germany: Schattauer ,  2006).
4 . Luiz Pessoa, and Ralph Adolphs, “Emotion Processing and the Amygdala: from a ‘Low Road’
to ‘Many Roads’ of Evaluating Biological Significance.” Natur e Reviews Neur oscience  1 1, no.
1 1 (2010): 773–83.
CHAPTER 19: REWIRING THE BRAIN: NEUROFEEDBACK
1 . H. H. Jasper , P . Solomon, and C. Bradley , “Electroencephalographic Analyses of Behavior
Problem Children,” American Journal of Psychiatry  95 (1938): 641–58; P . Solomon, H. H.Jasper , and C. Braley , “Studies in Behavior Problem Children,” American Neur ology and
Psychiatry  38 (1937): 1350–51.
2 . Martin T eicher at Harvard Medical School, has done extensive research that documents
temporal lobe abnormalities in adults who were abused as children: M. H. T eicher et al., “The
Neurobiological Consequences of Early Stress and Childhood Maltreatment,” Neur oscience &
Biobehavioral Reviews  27, no. 1–2) (2003): 33–44; M. H. T eicher et al., “Early Childhood
Abuse and Limbic System Ratings in Adult Psychiatric Outpatients,” Journal of
Neur opsychiatry & Clinical Neur osciences  5, no. 3 (1993): 301–6; M. H. T eicher , et al., “Sticks,
Stones and Hurtful W ords: Combined Ef fects of Childhood Maltreatment Matter Most,”
American Journal of Psychiatry  (2012).
3 . Sebern F . Fisher , Neur ofeedback in the T r eatment of Developmental T rauma: Calming the Fear -
Driven Brain . (New Y ork: Norton, 2014).
4 . J. N. Demos, Getting Started with Neur ofeedback  (New Y ork: WW Norton, 2005). See also R. J.
Davidson, “Af fective Style and Af fective Disorders: Prospectives from Af fective
Neuroscience,” Cognition and Emotion  12, no. 3 (1998): 307–30; and R. J. Davidson, et al.,
“Regional Brain Function, Emotion and Disorders of Emotion,” Curr ent Opinion in
Neur obiology  9 (1999): 228–34.
5 . J. Kamiya, “Conscious Control of Brain W aves,” Psychology T oday , April 1968, 56–60. See
also D. P . Nowlis, and J. Kamiya, “The Control of Electroencephalographic Alpha Rhythms
Through Auditory Feedback and the Associated Mental Activity ,” Psychophysiology  6, no. 4
(1970): 476–84 and D. Lantz and M. B. Sterman, “Neuropsychological Assessment of Subjects
with Uncontrolled Epilepsy: Ef fects of EEG Feedback T raining,” Epilepsia 29, no. 2 (1988):
163–71.
6 . M. B. Sterman, L. R. Macdonald, and R. K. Stone, “Biofeedback T raining of the Sensorimotor
Electroencephalogram Rhythm in Man: Ef fects on Epilepsy ,” Epilepsia  15, no. 3 (1974): 395–
416. A recent meta-analysis of eighty-seven studies showed that neurofeedback led to a
significant reduction in seizure frequency in approximately 80 percent of epileptics who
received the training. Gabriel T an, et al., “Meta-Analysis of EEG Biofeedback in T reating
Epilepsy ,”  Clinical EEG and Neur oscience  40, no. 3 (2009): 173–79.
7 . This is part of the same circuit of self-awareness that I described in chapter 5. Alvaro Pascual-
Leone has shown how , when one temporarily knocks out the area above the medial prefrontal
cortex with transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), people can temporarily not identify whom
they are looking at when they stare into the mirror . J. Pascual-Leone, “Mental Attention,
Consciousness, and the Progressive Emer gence of W isdom,” Journal of Adult Development  7 ,
no. 4 (2000): 241–54.
8 . http://www .eegspectrum.com/intro-to-neurofeedback/.
9 . S. Rauch, et al., “Symptom Provocation Study Using Positron Emission T omography and Script
Driven Imagery ,” Ar chives of General Psychiatry  53 (1996): 380–87. Three other studies using
a new way of imaging the brain, magnetoencephalography (MEG), showed that people with
PTSD suf fer from increased activation of the right temporal cortex: C. Catani, et al., “Pattern of
Cortical Activation During Processing of A versive Stimuli in T raumatized Survivors of W ar and
T orture,” Eur opean Ar chives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neur oscience  259, no. 6 (2009): 340–
51; B. E. Engdahl, et al., “Post-traumatic Stress Disorder: A Right T emporal Lobe Syndrome?”
Journal of Neural Engineering  7, no. 6 (2010): 066005; A. P . Geor gopoulos, et al., “The
Synchronous Neural Interactions T est as a Functional Neuromarker for Post-traumatic Stress
Disorder (PTSD): A Robust Classification Method Based on the Bootstrap,” Journal of Neural
Engineering  7. no. 1 (2010): 01601 1.
10 . As measured on the Clinician Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS).1 1 . As measured by John Briere’ s Inventory of Altered Self-Capacities (IASC).
12 . Posterior and central alpha rhythms are generated by thalamocortical networks; beta rhythms
appear to be generated by local cortical networks; and the frontal midline theta rhythm (the only
healthy theta rhythm in the human brain) is hypothetically generated by the septohippocampal
neuronal network. For a recent review see J. Kropotov , Quantitative EEG, ERP’ s And
Neur otherapy ( Amsterdam: Elsevier , 2009).
13 . H. Benson, “The Relaxation Response: Its Subjective and Objective Historical Precedents and
Physiology ,” T r ends in Neur osciences  6  (1983) : 281–84.
14 . T obias Egner and John H. Gruzelier , “Ecological V alidity of Neurofeedback: Modulation of
Slow W ave EEG Enhances Musical Performance,” Neur or eport 14 no. 9 (2003): 1221–4; David
J. V ernon, “Can Neurofeedback T raining Enhance Performance? An Evaluation of the Evidence
with Implications for Future Research,” Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback  30, no. 4
(2005): 347–64.
15 . “V ancouver Canucks Race to the Stanley Cup—Is It All in Their Minds?” Bio-Medical.com,
June 2, 201 1, http://bio-medical.com/news/201 1/06/vancouver -canucks-race-to-the-stanley-cup-
is-it-all-in-their -minds/.
16 . M. Beauregard, Brain W ars  (New Y ork: Harper Collins, 2013), p. 33.
17 . J. Gruzelier , T . Egner , and D. V ernon, “V alidating the Ef ficacy of Neurofeedback for
Optimising Performance,” Pr ogr ess in Brain Resear ch  159  (2006) : 421–31. See also D. V ernon
and J. Gruzelier , “Electroencephalographic Biofeedback as a Mechanism to Alter Mood,
Creativity and Artistic Performance,” in Mind-Body and Relaxation Resear ch Focus, ed. B. N.
De Luca  ( New Y ork: Nova Science, 2008) , 149–64.
18 . See, e.g., M. Arns, et al., “Ef ficacy of Neurofeedback T reatment in ADHD: The Ef fects on
Inattention, Impulsivity and Hyperactivity: A Meta-Analysis,” Clinical EEG and Neur oscience
40 ,  no. 3 (2009): 180–89; T . Rossiter , “The Ef fectiveness of Neurofeedback and Stimulant
Drugs in T reating AD/HD: Part I: Review of Methodological Issues,” Applied Psychophysiology
and Biofeedback  29, no. 2 (June 2004): 95–1 12; T . Rossiter , “The Ef fectiveness of
Neurofeedback and Stimulant Drugs in T reating AD/HD: Part II: Replication,” Applied
Psychophysiology and Biofeedback  29, no. 4 (2004): 233–43; and L. M. Hirshber g, S. Chiu, and
J. A. Frazier , “Emer ging Brain-Based Interventions for Children and Adolescents: Overview and
Clinical Perspective,” Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America 14, no. 1
(2005): 1–19.
19 . For more on qEEG, see http://thebrainlabs.com/qeeg.shtml.
20 . N. N. Boutros, M. T orello, and T . H. McGlashan, “Electrophysiological Aberrations in
Borderline Personality Disorder: State of the Evidence,” Journal of Neur opsychiatry and
Clinical Neur osciences  15 (2003): 145–54.
21 . In chapter 17, we saw how essential it is to cultivate a state of steady , calm self-observation,
which IFS calls a state of “being in self.” Dick Schwartz claims that with persistence anybody
can achieve such a state, and indeed, I have seen him help very traumatized people do precisely
that. I am not that skilled, and many of my most severely traumatized patients become frantic or
spaced out when we approach upsetting subjects. Others feel so chronically out of control that it
is dif ficult to find any abiding sense of “self.” In most psychiatric settings people with these
problems are given medications to stabilize them. Sometimes that works, but many patients lose
their motivation and drive. In our randomized controlled study of neurofeedback, chronically
traumatized patients had an approximately 30 percent reduction in PTSD symptoms and a
significant improvement in measures of executive function and emotional control (van der Kolk
et al., submitted 2014).22 . T raumatized kids with sensory-integration deficits need programs specifically developed for
their needs. At present, the leaders of this ef fort are my T rauma Center colleague Elizabeth
W arner and Adele Diamond at the University of British Columbia.
23 . R. J. Castillo, “Culture, T rance, and the Mind-Brain,” Anthr opology of Consciousness  6, no. 1
(March 1995): 17–34. See also B. Inglis, T rance: A Natural History of Alter ed States of Mind
(London: Paladin, 1990); N. F . Graf fin, W . J. Ray , and R. Lundy , “EEG Concomitants of
Hypnosis and Hypnotic Susceptibility ,” Journal of Abnormal Psychology  104, no. 1 (1995):
123–31; D. L. Schacter , “EEG Theta W aves and Psychological Phenomena: A Review and
Analysis,” Biological Psychology  5, no. 1 (1977): 47–82; and M. E. Sabourin, et al., “EEG
Correlates of Hypnotic Susceptibility and Hypnotic T rance: Spectral Analysis and Coherence,”
International Journal of Psychophysiology  10, no. 2 (1990): 125–42.
24 . E. G. Peniston and P . J. Kulkosky , “Alpha-Theta Brainwave Neuro-Feedback Therapy for
V ietnam V eterans with Combat-Related Post-traumatic Stress Disorder ,” Medical
Psychotherapy  4 (1991): 47–60.
25 . T . M. Sokhadze, R. L. Cannon, and D. L. T rudeau, “EEG Biofeedback as a T reatment for
Substance Use Disorders: Review , Rating of Ef ficacy and Recommendations for Further
Research,” Journal of Neur otherapy  12, no. 1 (2008): 5–43.
26 . R. C. Kessler , “Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: The Burden to the Individual and to Society ,”
Journal of Clinical Psychiatry  61, suppl. 5 (2000): 4–14. See also R. Acierno, et al., “Risk
Factors for Rape, Physical Assault, and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder in W omen: Examination
of Dif ferential Multivariate Relationships,” Journal of Anxiety Disor ders  13, no. 6 (1999): 541–
63; and H. D. Chilcoat and N. Breslau, “Investigations of Causal Pathways Between PTSD and
Drug Use Disorders,” Addictive Behaviors  23, no. 6 (1998): 827–40.
27 . S. L. Fahrion et al., “Alterations in EEG Amplitude, Personality Factors, and Brain Electrical
Mapping After Alpha-Theta Brainwave T raining: A Controlled Case Study of an Alcoholic in
Recovery ,” Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Resear ch  16, no. 3 (June 1992): 547–52; R.
J. Goldber g, J. C. Greenwood, and Z. T aintor , “Alpha Conditioning as an Adjunct T reatment for
Drug Dependence: Part 1,” International Journal of Addiction  1 1, no. 6 (1976): 1085–89; R. F .
Kaplan, et al., “Power and Coherence Analysis of the EEG in Hospitalized Alcoholics and
Nonalcoholic Controls,” Journal of Studies on Alcohol  46 (1985): 122–27; Y . Lamontagne et al.,
“Alpha and EMG Feedback T raining in the Prevention of Drug Abuse: A Controlled Study ,”
Canadian Psychiatric Association Journal  22, no. 6 (October 1977): 301–10; Saxby and E. G.
Peniston, “Alpha-Theta Brainwave Neurofeedback T raining: An Ef fective T reatment for Male
and Female Alcoholics with Depressive Symptoms,” Journal of Clinical Psychology  51, no. 5
(1995): 685–93; W . C. Scott, et al., “Ef fects of an EEG Biofeedback Protocol on a Mixed
Substance Abusing Population,” American Journal Drug and Alcohol Abuse  31, no. 3 (2005):
455–69; and D. L. T rudeau, “Applicability of Brain W ave Biofeedback to Substance Use
Disorder in Adolescents,” Child & Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America  14, no. 1
(January 2005): 125–36.
28 . E. G. Peniston, “EMG Biofeedback-Assisted Desensitization T reatment for V ietnam Combat
V eterans Post-traumatic Stress Disorder ,” Clinical Biofeedback and Health  9 (1986): 35–41.
29 . Eugene G. Peniston, and Paul J. Kulkosky . “Alpha-Theta Brainwave Neurofeedback for
V ietnam V eterans with Combat-Related Post-T raumatic Stress Disorder .” Medical
Psychotherapy  4, no. 1 (1991): 47-60.
30 . Similar results were reported by another group seven years later: W . C. Scott, et al., “Ef fects of
an EEG Biofeedback Protocol on a Mixed Substance Abusing Population,” American Journal of
Drug and Alcohol Abuse 31, no. 3 (2005): 455–69.31 . D. L. T rudeau, T . M. Sokhadze, and R. L. Cannon, “Neurofeedback in Alcohol and Drug
Dependency ,” in Introduction to Q uantitative EEG and Neur ofeedback : Advanced Theory and
Applications , ed. T . Budzynski, et al. Amsterdam, Elsevier , (1999) pp. 241–68; F . D. Arani, R.
Rostami, and M. Nostratabadi, “Ef fectiveness of Neurofeedback T raining as a T reatment for
Opioid-Dependent Patients,” Clinical EEG and Neur oscience  41, no. 3 (2010): 170–77; F .
Dehghani-Arani, R. Rostami, and H. Nadali, “Neurofeedback T raining for Opiate Addiction:
Improvement of Mental Health and Craving,” Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback , 38,
no. 2 (2013): 133–41; J. Luigjes, et al., “Neuromodulation as an Intervention for Addiction:
Overview and Future Prospects,” T ijdschrift voor psychiatrie 55, no. 1 1 (2012): 841–52.
32 . S. Othmer , “Remediating PTSD with Neurofeedback,” October 1 1, 201 1,
http://hannokirk.com/files/Remediating-PTSD_10-01-1 1.pdf.
33 . F . H. Duf fy , “The State of EEG Biofeedback Therapy (EEG Operant Conditioning) in 2000:
An Editor ’ s Opinion,” an editorial in Clinical Electr oencephalography  31, no. 1 (2000): v–viii.
34 . Thomas R. Insel, “Faulty Circuits,” Scientific American  302, no. 4 (2010): 44-51.
35 . T . Insel, “T ransforming Diagnosis,” National Insitute of Mental Health, Director ’ s Blog, April
29, 2013, http://www .nimh.nih.gov/about/director/2013/transforming-diagnosis.shtml.
36 . Joshua W . Buckholtz and Andreas Meyer -Lindenber g, “Psychopathology and the Human
Connectome: T oward a T ransdiagnostic Model of Risk For Mental Illness,” Neur on  74, no. 4
(2012): 990–1004.
37 . F . Collins, “The Symphony Inside Y our Brain,” NIH Director ’ s Blog, November 5, 2012,
http://directorsblog.nih.gov/2012/1 1/05/the-symphony-inside-your -brain/.
CHAPTER 20: FINDING YOUR V OICE: COMMUNAL RHYTHMS AND THEA TER
1 . F . Butterfield, “David Mamet Lends a Hand to Homeless V ietnam V eterans,” New Y ork T imes ,
October 10, 1998. For more on the new shelter , see http://www .nechv .or g/historyatnechv .html.
2 . P . Healy , “The Anguish of W ar for T oday’ s Soldiers, Explored by Sophocles,” New Y ork T imes ,
November 1 1, 2009. For more on Doerries’ s project, see
http://www .outsidethewirellc.com/projects/theater -of-war/overview .
3 . Sara Krulwich, “The Theater of W ar ,” New Y ork T imes, November 1 1, 2009.
4 . W . H. McNeill, Keeping T ogether in T ime: Dance and Drill in Human History  (Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 1997).
5 . Plutarch, Lives , vol. 1 (Digireads.com, 2009), 58.
6 . M. Z. Seitz, “The Singing Revolution,” New Y ork T imes , December 14, 2007.
7 . For more on Urban Improv , see http://www .urbanimprov .or g/.
8 . The T rauma Center W eb site, of fers a full-scale downloadable curriculum for a fourth-grade
Urban Improv program that can be run by teachers nationwide.
http://www .traumacenter .or g/initiatives/psychosocial.php.
9 . For more on the Possibility Project, see http://the-possibility-project.or g/.
10 . For more on Shakespeare in the Courts, see http://www .shakespeare.or g/education/for -
youth/shakespeare-courts/.
1 1 . C. Kisiel, et al., “Evaluation of a Theater -Based Y outh V iolence Prevention Program for
Elementary School Children,” Journal of School V iolence  5 ,  no. 2 (2006): 19–36.
12 . The Urban Improv and T rauma Center leaders were Amie Alley , PhD, Mar garet Blaustein,
PhD, T oby Dewey , MA, Ron Jones, Merle Perkins, Kevin Smith, Faith Soloway , Joseph
Spinazzola, PhD.
13 . H. Epstein and T . Packer , The Shakespear e & Company Actor T raining Experience  (Lenox
MA, Plunkett Lake Press, 2007); H. Epstein, T ina Packer Builds a Theater  (Lenox, MA:Plunkett Lake Press, 2010).I N D E X
The page numbers in this index refer to the printed version of this book. T o find the corresponding
locations in the text of this digital version, please use the “search” function on your e-reader . Note
that not all terms may be searchable.
Page numbers in italics  refer to illustrations.
abandonment, 140, 141, 150, 179, 301, 304, 327, 340, 350
Abilify , 37, 101, 226
ACE (Adverse Childhood Experiences) study , 85, 144–48, 156, 347, 350–51
acetylcholine, 266
acupressure, 264–65, 410 n –1 1 n
acupuncture, 231, 410 n –1 1 n
addiction, see  substance abuse
addictive behaviors, 288–89
see also  specific behaviors
ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder), 107, 136, 150, 310, 322
adolescent behavior problems, child-caregiver relationship as predictor of, 160–61
adrenaline, 46, 61, 77, 176, 225
Aeschylus, 332
Afghanistan W ar:
deaths in, 348
veterans of, 222–23, 229, 332
agency , sense of, 95–98, 331, 355
as lacking in childhood trauma survivors, 1 13
Ainsworth, Mary , 1 15
Ajax  (Sophocles), 332
alcoholism, 146
alexithymia, 98–99, 247, 272–73, 291, 319
All Quiet on the W estern Fr ont  (Remarque), 171, 186
alpha-theta training, 321, 326
alpha waves, 314–15, 321, 326, 417 n
American Academy of Pediatrics, 348
American College of Neuropsychopharmacology (ACNP), 29, 33
American Counseling Association, 165, 393 n
American Journal of Psychiatry ,  27, 140, 164American Psychiatric Association (AP A):
developmental trauma disorder diagnosis rejected by , 149, 158–59, 166
PTSD recognized by , 19
see also  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor ders  (DSM)
American Psychological Association, 165, 393 n
amnesia, 179, 183
dissociative, 190
see also  repressed memory
amygdala, 33, 35, 42, 68–69, 301
balance between MPFC and, 62–64
fight/flight response and, 60–61, 61,  247, 265, 408 n
mindfulness and, 209–10
Anda, Robert, 144, 148
androstenedione, 163
anesthesia awareness, 196–99
Angell, Marcia, 374 n –75 n
Angelou, Maya, 356
animals, in trauma therapy , 80, 150–51, 213
anorexia nervosa, 98–99
anterior cingulate, 91, 91,  254, 376 n,  387 n
Anthony (trauma survivor), 150
anticonvulsant drugs, 225
antidepressants, 35, 37, 136, 146, 225
see also  specific drugs
antipsychotic drugs, 27–29, 101, 136, 224, 225–27
children and, 37–38, 226
PTSD and, 226–27
see also  specific drugs
anxiety , 150
ARC (attachment, self-regulation, competency) model, 401 n
Archimedes, 92
arousal, 56, 107, 153, 165
flashbacks and, 42–43, 196–97
in infants, 84, 1 13, 121, 161
memory and, 175–76
neurofeedback and, 326
PTSD and, 157, 326
regulation of, 77–79, 1 13, 160, 161, 205–8
sexual, 94, 108
SNS and, 77
soothing and, 1 13
yoga and, 270
see also  threat, hypersensitivity to
art, trauma recovery and, 242–43
asanas,  270, 272
Assault, The  (film), 375
athletics, 349, 355
Ativan, 225attachment, 109–1 1, 1 13, 128–29, 210, 213, 318, 401 n
anxious (ambivalent), 1 16, 1 17
avoidant, 1 16, 1 17
as basic instinct, 1 15
ongoing need for , 1 14–15
resilience and, 161
in rhesus monkeys, 153–54
secure, 1 15–16, 1 17, 154–55
attachment, disor ganized, 1 17, 166, 381 n
long-term ef fects of, 1 19–21
psychiatric and physiological problems from, 1 18
socioeconomic stress and, 1 17–18
trauma and, 1 18–19
traumatized parents as contributors to, 1 18
attachment disorder , 282
attention deficit disorder (ADD), 151
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 107, 136, 150
attractors, 32
attunement, emotional, 1 1 1–14, 1 17, 1 18, 122, 161, 213, 215, 354
lack of, dissociation and, 121–22
in relationships, 210
Auden, W . H., 125
Auerhahn, Nanette C., 372 n
Auschwitz concentration camp, 195
autobiographical self, 236
autoimmune disease, 291–92
Automatisme psychologique, L ’  (Janet), 178
autonomic nervous system (ANS), 60, 63–64, 77, 80, 225, 266–67
balance (proprioceptive) system, 247
Baltimore, Md., home-visitation program in, 167
basal ganglia, 254
Bastiaans, Jan, 223
Beebe, Beatrice, 109, 1 18
Beecher , Henry K., 32–33
befriending one’ s body , 96, 100–101, 206–19, 206,  273, 274–75, 354
benzodiazepines, 225, 227
Ber ger , Hans, 310
beta waves, 314, 322, 417 n
binge eating, 120
Bion, W ilfred, 109
bipolar disorder , 136, 151, 226
Blaustein, Mar garet, 351, 401 n
Bleuler , Eugen, 24–25
blood pressure, 46, 61, 66
body:
befriending of, 96, 100–101, 206–19, 206,  273, 274–75, 354islands of safety in, 245, 275
self-awareness of, 87–102, 206, 206,  208–9, 236, 237–38, 247, 382 n
body-brain connections, 74–86, 381 n
body functions, brain stem regulation of, 56, 94–95, 266
body therapies, 3, 26, 72, 86, 89, 207–8, 215–17, 228–29, 245
see also  specific therapies
borderline personality disorder (BPD), childhood trauma and, 138–41
Bowlby , John, 109–1 1, 1 14, 1 15, 121, 140–41, 232
brain:
bodily needs and, 55
cognitive, see  rational brain
default state network (DSN) in, 90
electrophysiology of, 310–12, 328–29
left vs. right sides of, 44–45, 298
midline (“Mohawk”) structures of, 90–91, 91,  376 n
old, see  emotional brain
sensory information or ganized by , 55, 60
survival as basic job of, 55, 94
trauma and changes to, 2–3, 21, 59,  347
triune model of, 59,  64
warning systems in, 55
see also  specific r egions
brain scans, 21
of PTSD patients, 102, 347, 408 n
of trauma survivors, 39–47, 42,  66, 68–70, 68,  71–72, 72,  82, 99–100, 319
brain stem (reptilian brain), 55–56, 59,  60, 63,  176
basic body functions regulated by , 56, 94–95, 266
freeze response generated by , 83
self-awareness and, 93–94
see also  emotional brain
brain waves, 321
alpha, 315, 321, 326, 417 n
beta, 314, 322, 417 n
combat and, 324
delta, 320
dreaming and, 321
theta, 321, 326, 417 n
of trauma survivors, 31 1–12, 31 1,  320
breathing:
ANS regulation through, 64
in fight/flight response, 61
HR V and, 267
therapeutic, 72, 131, 207, 208, 245, 268–69
in yoga ( pranayama ), 86, 270
Breuer , Josef, 181–82, 194, 231, 246
British General Staf f, shell-shock diagnosis rejected by , 185
British Psychological Society , 165
Broca’ s area, 43, 44, 45, 408 nBrodmann’ s area 19, 44
Buchenwald concentration camp, 43
bulimia, 34, 98–99, 286, 287
calming and relaxation techniques, 131, 203–4
see also  breathing; mindfulness; yoga
cancer , 267
Cannon, Katie, 184
caregivers:
attunement of infants and, 1 1 1–13, 1 17, 1 18
children’ s loyalty to, 133, 386 n
children’ s relationships with, as predictor of adolescent behavior , 160–61
infants’ bonds with, 109–1 1, 1 13, 128–29
insecure attachments with, 1 15–16
as source of children’ s distress, 1 16–17
traumatized, and disor ganized attachment in children, 1 18
catatonia, 23
Catholic Church, pedophile scandals in, 171–75, 183, 190, 191
CBT , see  cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT)
CD45 cells, 127
Celexa, 35, 254
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 1, 144
Chang, C.-C., 22
Charcot, Jean-Martin, 177–78, 178,  182, 184
Chemtob, Claude, 1 19
childhood trauma survivors, 123–35, 351
agency , sense of, as lacking in, 1 13
arousal in, 161
attachment coping styles in, 1 14–20
attention and concentration problems in, 158, 166, 245–46, 328
borderline personality disorder and, 138–41
disor ganized attachment in, 1 18–19, 166
dysregulation in, 158, 161, 166
high-risk behavior in, 120, 134, 147
home-visitation program for , 167
hypersensitivity to threat in, 158, 161, 310, 328
increased risk of rape and domestic abuse in, 85, 146–47
inhibition of curiosity in, 141, 350
internal world maps of, 127–30
loyalty to caregivers of, 133
misdiagnosis of, 136–48, 150, 151, 157, 226, 282
numbing in, 279
rage in, 304
relationship dif ficulties of, 158
safety , sense of, as lacking in, 141, 213, 301, 317
school problems of, 146, 158, 161
schools as resources for , 351–56self-harming in, 141, 158
self-hatred in, 158, 279
sense of competence lacking in, 166, 350
social engagement and, 161
social support for , 167–68, 350
substance abuse by , 146, 151
suicidal behavior in, 141, 146
temporal lobe abnormalities in, 416 n
trust as dif ficult for , 141, 158, 340
see also  developmental trauma disorder (DTS)
childhood trauma survivors, of emotional abuse and neglect:
abandonment of, 141, 304, 327, 340
depersonalization in, 72
numbing in, 87–89
prevalence of, 20–21
psychotherapy of, 296–97
Sandy as, 97
self-harming in, 87, 88
self-respect lacking in, 304
sense of safety lacking in, 296–97
submissiveness in, 97, 218
substance abuse by , 327
suicidal behavior in, 88, 290
trust as dif ficult for , 150
childhood trauma survivors, of sexual abuse and family violence:
dissociation in, 132–33, 162, 172, 265, 316, 329
flashbacks of, 20, 131, 135, 172, 173
“hallucinations” in, 25
helplessness of, 131, 133–34, 21 1, 265, 289–90
hypersensitivity to threat in, 17, 143
of incest, see  incest survivors
incoherent sense of self in, 166
intimacy as dif ficult for , 143
isolation of, 131
legal cases involving, 174–75, 183, 190
Lisa as, 316–18, 325, 329
loyalty to caregivers of, 386 n
Maggie as, 250–51
Maria as, 300–304
Marilyn as, 123–35, 289
Mary as, 130, 277–78
nightmares of, 20, 134–35
numbing in, 124, 265–66
obesity in, 144, 147, 266
prevalence of, 1, 1 1, 20–21
public acknowledgment of, 189
rage in, 285
repressed memories in, 190seizures in, 172, 174
self-blame in, 131
self-deceit in, 2, 23–24
self-harming in, 20, 25, 141, 172, 264, 316, 317
self-hatred in, 134, 143
shame in, 13–14, 67, 132, 174
substance abuse by , 327
suicidal behavior in, 141, 147, 150–51, 286, 287, 316
T A T test and, 106–7
trust as dif ficult for , 134
children:
abuse of, as most costly public health issue, 148, 149–50
antipsychotic drugs prescribed to, 37–38, 226
attachment in, see  attachment
caregivers’ relationships with, as predictor of adolescent behavior , 160–61
internal world maps of, 109, 127, 129
loyalty to caregivers of, 133
see also  infants
Children’ s Clinic (MMHC), 105–9, 1 1 1, 121
Child Sexual Abuse Accommodation Syndr ome, The  (Summit), 131, 136
China, traditional medicine in, 207
chlorpromazine (Thorazine), 22–23
chronic fatigue syndrome, 330
clonidine, 225
Clozaril, 28
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), 182, 230–31, 246, 292
in treatment of PTSD, 194, 220–21
Coleman, Kevin, 336, 342, 344
collapse, see  freeze response (immobilization)
combat:
brain waves and, 324
see also  PTSD (posttraumatic stress disorder), of combat veterans
community , mental health and, 38, 213–14, 244, 331–34, 355
Community Mental Health Act (1963), 373 n
competence, sense of, 166, 341
Compr ehensive T extbook of Psychiatry  (Freedman and Kaplan), 20, 188–89
conduct disorder , 282, 392 n
conflict:
as central to theater , 335
trauma survivors’ fear of, 335
consciousness, see  self
Cope, Stephen, 123, 230, 263, 272
cortical networks, local, 417 n
cortisol, 30, 61, 154, 162, 223
Countway Library of Medicine, 1 1, 24
creativity , see  imagination
Cummings, Adam, 155
cummings, e. e., 122Cymbalta, 35, 37
Dalai Lama, 79
Damasio, Antonio, 93, 94–95, 382 n
dance:
in trauma recovery , 242–43, 355
see also  rhythmic movement
Darwin, Charles, 74–76, 75,  77
Daubert hearings, 174–75
Decety , Jean, 222
default state network (DSN), 90
Defense Department, U.S., 156, 224, 226–27, 332
Pharmacoeconomic Center of, 224
defense mechanisms, suspension of, in intimate relationships, 84–85
Delbo, Charlotte, 195
delta waves, 320
Dementia Praecox  (Bleuler), 24–25
denial, 46, 291
Denial: A Memoir  (Stern), 7
depersonalization, 71–73, 71,  99–100, 132–33, 286, 386 n,  401 n
depression, 136, 150, 162, 225
chemistry of, 26, 29
derealization, 401 n
desensitization therapies, 46–47, 73, 220, 222–23
developmental psychopathology , 2
developmental trauma disorder (DTS; proposed), 166–68
AP A ’ s rejection of, 149, 158–59, 166
criteria for , 158, 359–62
see also  childhood trauma survivors
Dewey , Kippy , 337
diagnosis, definition of, 137–38
diagnosis, psychiatric, childhood trauma as misunderstood in, 136–48
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor ders  (DSM), 29, 137
arbitrariness of, 323
childhood trauma survivors ignored by , 143
DSM-III, 29, 137, 142, 156, 190
DSM-IV , 143
DSM-5, 159, 164–66, 329, 393 n
reliability issues in, 164–65
social causation ignored in, 165
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), 262, 270
Diamond, Adele, 418 n
disruptive mood dysregulation disorder , 157, 393 n
dissociation, 66–68, 95, 179, 180–81, 194, 21 1, 247, 281, 294, 317–18, 401 n
maternal misattunement and, 121–22, 286
neurofeedback and, 318
in sexual abuse survivors, 132–33, 162, 172, 265, 316, 329dissociative amnesia, 190
dissociative identity disorder (DID), 277–78
Doerries, Bryan, 332
domestic violence, 1, 1 1, 23–24
deaths from, 348
increased incidence of, in survivors of childhood abuse, 85, 146–47
repressed memory and, 190
victims’ loyalty to abusers in, 133
victims’ submissiveness in, 218
dopamine, 29, 226
dorsal vagal complex (DVC), 82, 82,  83
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), 68–69, 376 n
dreaming, 260–61, 308, 309–10, 321
drumming, 86, 208
Duf fy , Frank, 328
Dunkirk evacuation, repressed memory and, 189–90
dysfunctional thinking, 246
ecstasy (MDMA), 223–24
education system:
cutting of social engagement programs in, 349
inattention to emotional brain in, 86
as resources for childhood trauma recovery , 351–56
EEGs (electroencephalograms), 309–1 1, 320, 321
Ef fexor , 225
Ekman, Paul, 74
Eli Lilly , 34–35
El Sistema, 355
EMDR, see  eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR)
Emerson, David, 269
emotional brain, 54, 57, 62, 63,  176, 226, 265
balance between rational brain and, 64–65, 129–30, 205, 310
befriending of, 206–19, 206,  273, 274–75
education system’ s inattention to, 86
inner world map encoded in, 129
medial prefrontal cortex and, 206, 206,  236, 353
physical manifestations of trauma in, 204–5
Emotional Freedom T echnique (EFT), 264–65
emotional intelligence, 354
emotions:
articulation of, 232–34
calming ef fect of physical activity on, 88
fear of, in trauma survivors, 335
physical expression of, 74–76, 75,  78
regulation of, see  self-regulation
in therapeutic theater , 335, 344–45
vagus nerve and, 76, 78, 80–82, 81writing and, 238–42
empathy , 58–60, 1 1 1–12, 161
endocrine system, 56
endorphins, 32
epigenetics, 152
epilepsy , 310, 315
equine therapy , 150–51, 213
Erichsen, John Eric, 189
Erickson, Milton, 254
Esalen Institute, 300
Estonia, “Singing Revolution” in, 334
Eth, Spencer , 231
executive function, 62, 323
exiles (in IFS therapy), 281–82, 289–90, 291–95
exposure therapy , 194
EMDR vs., 255–56
PTSD and, 256
Expr ession of the Emotions in Man and Animals, The  (Darwin), 74–76
eye contact, direct vs. averted, 102
eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR), 47, 220, 225, 228, 231, 246, 248–62, 290,
308, 321
author ’ s training in, 251–53
clinical study of, 254–55
exposure therapy vs., 255–56
medication vs., 254, 261
origin of, 251
PTSD and, 248–49, 253–54, 260
sleep disorders and, 259–61
eyewitness testimony , unreliability of, 192
Fairbairn, Ronald, 109
false memories, 189, 190, 191–92
Father -Daughter Incest  (Herman), 138
“Faulty Circuits” (Insel), 328
Feeling of What Happens, The  (Damasio), 93
Feldenkrais, Moshe, 92
Felitti, V incent, 143–47, 156
feminist movement, 189
fight/flight response, 30, 42, 45–47, 54, 57, 60–61, 64, 77, 78, 80, 82,  85, 96, 97, 209, 217, 218, 247,
265, 329, 408 n
firefighters, in IFS therapy , 282, 288–89, 291–92
Fisher , Sebern, 312–14, 316–18, 325
Fish-Murray , Nina, 105–7
Fisler , Rita, 40
flashbacks, 8, 13, 16, 20, 40, 42, 44, 45, 66–67, 68, 68,  70, 72, 101, 135, 172, 173, 176, 193–94,
196–98, 219, 227
fluoxetine, see  Prozac (fluoxetine)Foa, Edna, 233
focus:
in trauma recovery , 203, 347–48, 355
trauma survivors’ dif ficulties with, 158, 166, 245–46, 31 1–12, 328
Fortunof f V ideo Archive, 195
Fosha, Diana, 105
foster -care youth, Possibility Project theater program for , 340–42
free writing, 238–39
freeze response (immobilization), 54, 54,  82–83, 82,  85, 95, 217, 218, 265
of Ute Lawrence, 65–66, 68, 71–72, 80, 82, 99–100, 219–20
see also  numbing
Freud, Sigmund, 15, 27, 177, 181–82, 183, 184, 194, 219, 220, 231, 246–47
Frewen, Paul, 99
Friedman, Matthew , 159
frontal cortex, 314
frontal lobes, 57–58, 62, 176
ADHD and, 310, 320
empathy and, 58–60
imagination and, 58
PTSD and, 320
see also  medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC)
frontal midline theta rhythm, 417 n
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), 39, 66
Fussell, Paul, 243–44
Galen, 77
Gazzaniga, Michael, 280–81
gene expression:
attachment and, 154–55
stress and, 152, 347
genetics:
mental illness and, 151–52
of rhesus monkeys, 153–54
Germany , treatment of shell-shock victims in, 185, 186–87
Glenhaven Academy , V an der Kolk Center at, 213, 401 n
Gottman, John, 1 13
Grant Study of Adult Development, 175
Gray , Jef frey , 33
Great Depression, 186
Gr eat W ar in Modern Memory , The  (Fussell), 243–44
Gr eat W ork of Y our Life, The  (Cope), 230
Greenber g, Mark, 31, 32, 33
Greenber g, Ramon, 409 n
Greer , Germaine, 187
Grif fin, Paul, 335, 340–42
Gross, Steve, 85
group therapy , limits of, 18Gruzelier , John, 322
gun control, 348
Guntrip, Harry , 109
gut feelings, 96–97
Haig, Douglas, 185
Haley , Sarah, 13
Hamlin, Ed, 323
handwriting, switching in, 241–42
Harris, Bill, 155
Hartmann, Ernest, 309–10
Harvard Medical School, 40
Countway Library of Medicine at, 1 1, 24
Laboratory of Human Development at, 1 12
see also  Massachusetts Mental Health Center
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 309
Head Start, 350
heart disease, 267
HeartMath, 413 n
heart rate, 46, 61, 66, 72, 1 16
heart rate variability (HR V), 77, 266–69, 268,  271, 355, 413 n
Heckman, James, 167, 347
Hedges, Chris, 31
helplessness, of trauma survivors, 131, 133–34, 21 1, 265, 289–90, 341
Herman, Judith, 138–41, 189, 296
hippocampus, 60, 69, 176
Hobson, Allan, 26, 259–60, 261
Holocaust, 43
Holocaust survivors, 99, 195, 223, 372 n
children of, 1 18–19, 293–95
Holocaust T estimonies: The Ruins of Memory  (Langer), 195, 372 n
Hölzel, Britta, 209–10, 275
homeostasis, 56
Hopper , Jim, 266
Hosseini, Khaled, 7
human connectome, 329
humans, as social animals, 1 10, 166, 349
Hurt Locker , The  (film), 312
Huston, John, 187, 220
hypnagogic (trance) states, 1 17, 187, 238, 302, 305, 326
hypnosis, 187, 220
hypothalamus, 56, 60
hysteria, 177–78, 178
Freud and Breuer on, 181–82, 194
hysterical blindness, 126
imagination:dreams and, 261
frontal lobes as seat of, 58
loss of, 17, 350
pathological, 25
psychomotor therapy and, 305
recovery of, 205
imitation, 1 12
immobilization, see  freeze response (immobilization)
immune system, 56
stress and, 240
of trauma survivors, 126–27, 291
impulsivity , 120, 164
incest survivors:
cognitive defects in, 162
depression in, 162
dissociation in, 132–33, 162
distorted perception of safety in, 164
father -daughter , 20, 188–89, 250, 265
high-risk behavior in, 164
hypersensitivity to threat in, 163
immune systems of, 126–27
longitudinal study of, 161–64
misguided views of, 20, 188–89
numbing in, 162–63
obesity in, 144, 162
self-harming in, 162
self-hatred in, 163
troubled sexual development in, 162, 163
trust as dif ficult for , 163
India, traditional medicine in, 207
inescapable shock, 29–31
infants, 83–84
arousal in, 84, 1 13, 121, 161
attunement of caregivers and, 1 1 1–13, 1 17, 1 18
caregivers’ bonds with, 109–1 1, 1 13, 128–29
internal locus of control in, 1 13
sense of self in, 1 13
sensory experiences of, 93–94
VVC development in, 83–84
inferior medial prefrontal cortex, 376 n
Insel, Thomas, 328
Institute of the Pennsylvania Hospital, 251
insula, 91, 91,  247, 274, 274,  382
integration, of traumatic memories, 181, 219–20, 222, 228, 237, 279, 308
interdependence, 340–41
intermittent explosive disorder , 151
internal family systems (IFS) therapy , 223–24, 262, 281–95, 418 n
exiles in, 281–82, 289–90, 291–95firefighters in, 282, 288–89, 291–92
managers in, 282, 286–88, 291–92, 293
mindfulness in, 283
rheumatoid arthritis and, 291–92
Self in, 224, 283–85, 288, 289, 305
unburdening in, 295
interoception, 95–96, 413 n
yoga and, 272–74
see also  sensory self-awareness
interpersonal neurobiology , 2, 58–60
intimacy:
suspension of defense mechanisms in, 84–85
trauma survivors’ dif ficulty with, 99, 143
Iraq W ar:
deaths in, 348
veterans of, 220, 221, 222–23, 229, 312, 332
irritability , 10
isolation, of childhood sexual abuse survivors, 131
James, W illiam, 89–90, 93, 184, 277, 280, 296, 309
Janet, Pierre, 54, 177, 178–79, 181, 182, 184, 194, 218, 220, 312, 396 n
Jouvet, Michel, 259–60
Jung, Carl, 27, 280, 296
Justice Resource Institute, 339, 401 n
Kabat-Zinn, Jon, 209
Kagan, Jerome, 79, 237–38
Kaiser Permanente, 144
Kamiya, Joe, 315
Kandel, Eric, 26
Kardiner , Abram, 1 1, 187, 189, 371 n
Katrina, Hurricane, 54
Keats, John, 248
Keegan, John, 185
Keeping T ogether in T ime  (McNeill), 333
Keller , Helen, 234–35
Kennedy , John F ., 373 n
Kinnebur gh, Kristine, 401 n
Kite Runner , The  (Hosseini), 7
Klonopin, 225
Kluft, Richard, 251, 281
Koch, Robert, 164
Kradin, Richard, 126
Krantz, Anne, 243
Krystal, Henry , 99
Krystal, John, 30
Kulkosky , Paul, 326, 327Lancet,  189
Langer , Lawrence, 195, 372 n
language:
failure of, in trauma survivors, 43–44, 243–45, 352–53
limitations of, 235–37, 243–45
mental health and, 38
self-discovery and, 234–35
in trauma recovery , 230–47, 275–76
Lanius, Ruth, 66, 90, 92, 99, 102
Laub, Dori, 372 n
Lawrence, T . E., 232
Lazar , Sara, 209–10, 275
learning disabilities, neurofeedback and, 325
LeDoux, Joseph, 60, 206
legal cases:
admissibility of evidence in, 174–75
involving pedophile priests, 183, 190, 191
Lejune, Camp, 270
Letters to a Y oung Poet  (Rilke), 87
Let Ther e Be Light  (film), 187, 220
Levine, Peter , 26, 96, 217–18, 245, 408 n
Lifton, Robert J., 19
limbic system, 42, 42,  56–57, 59,  60, 64
development of, 56–57
therapy for , 205–6
in trauma survivors, 59,  95, 176, 265
see also  emotional brain
lithium, 27–28, 136, 225
loss, as basic human experience, 26–27
love, as basic human experience, 26–27
LSD, 223
L-tryptophan, 34
lupus erythematosus, 126
L yons-Ruth, Karlen, 1 19–22
MacArthur , Douglas, 186
Macbeth  (Shakespeare), 43, 230
McFarlane, Alexander , 89, 245–46, 31 1–12, 324–25
McGaugh, James, 176
MacLean, Paul, 64
McNeill, W illiam H., 333
Maier , Steven, 29–30
Main, Mary , 1 15–17, 381 n
Mamet, David, 331
managers, in IFS therapy , 282, 286–88, 291–92, 293
Mandela, Nelson, 356
map of the world, internal:in childhood trauma survivors, 127–30
of children, 109, 127, 129
Mar ch of the Penguins  (film), 96
Marlantes, Karl, 233–34
martial arts, 86, 208, 355
Massachusetts Department of Mental Health, 253
Massachusetts General Hospital, 192, 251
Neuroimaging Laboratory of, 40
Massachusetts Mental Health Center , 19–20, 22, 26, 28, 36, 142, 259–60
see also  Children’ s Clinic (MMHC); T rauma Clinic
massage therapy , 89, 92
Matthew , Elizabeth, 253–54
Maurice, Prince of Orange, 333–34
MDMA (ecstasy), 223–24
meaning-making, as human trait, 16–17
medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC), 62, 63,  69, 91,  92, 96, 274, 274
accessing emotional brain through, 206, 206,  236, 353
balance between amygdala and, 62–64
sensory self-awareness and, 90–91, 206, 354, 376 n,  408 n,  417 n
Medicaid, 37
medicine, non-W estern, 76, 86, 207–8
meditation, 208
mindfulness, 63, 321, 400 n
in yoga, 270
Meltzof f, Andrew , 1 12
memory:
level of arousal and, 175–76
as narrative, 176, 179, 194, 219
rewriting of, 175, 191, 236, 255–56, 398 n
see also  repressed memory; traumatic memory
mental health, safety as fundamental to, 351, 352
mental hospitals, population of, 28
mental illness:
disorder model of, 27
genetics and, 151–52
pharmacological revolution and, 36–38
as self-protective adaptations, 278–79
social engagement and, 78–79
methylation, 152
militarism, 186
mindfulness, 62, 63, 96, 131, 207, 208–10, 224, 225, 269, 270, 283, 292, 321
meditation for , 63, 321, 400 n
Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction (MBSR), 209
Minnesota Longitudinal Study of Risk and Adaptation, 160–61
Minsky , Marvin, 281
mirror neurons, 58–59, 78, 102, 1 1 1–12
misdiagnosis, of childhood trauma survivors, 136–48, 150, 151, 157, 226
model mugging program, 218–19, 308monomethylhydrazine (MMH), 315
mood dysregulation disorder , 226
mood stabilizing drugs, 225
Moore, Dana, 269
MPFC, see  medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC)
multiple personality disorder , 277–78
Murray , Henry , 105–6
Murrow , Ed, 43
muscular bonding, 333–34
music, in trauma recovery , 242–43, 349, 355
Myers, Charles Samuel, 185, 187, 189
Myers, Frederic, 189
naltrexone, 327
Nathan Cummings Foundation, 155
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), 315
National Association of State Mental Health Program Directors, 159
National Child T raumatic Stress Network (NCTSN), 155–56, 157, 351, 356
National Institutes of Health, 28, 138, 207, 251, 254, 315, 329
DSM-5 diagnostic criteria rejected by , 165–66, 329
nature vs. nurture debate, 153–55, 160
Nazis, shell-shock victims as viewed by , 186–87
neocortex, see  rational brain
nervous system, 76–77
autonomic (ANS), 60, 63–64, 77, 80, 225, 266–67
parasympathetic (PNS), 77, 83–84, 264, 266–67
sympathetic (SNS), 77, 82, 82,  209, 266–67
neuroception, 80
neurofeedback, 207, 312–29, 313,  418 n
ADHD and, 322
alpha-theta training in, 321, 326
author ’ s experience of, 313–14
dissociation and, 318
epilepsy and, 315
history of, 315
learning disabilities and, 325
performance enhancement and, 322
PTSD and, 326–28
self-regulation in, 313
substance abuse and, 327–28
T rauma Center program for , 318–20
neuroimaging, see  brain scans
neuroplasticity , 3, 56, 167
neuroscience, 2, 29, 39, 275, 347
neurotransmitters, 28–29
see also  specific neur otransmitters
Newber ger , Carolyn and Eli, 355New England Journal of Medicine,  374 n –75 n
New Y ork T imes,  334, 375 n
nightmares, 8, 9, 14, 15, 20, 44, 134–35, 327
Nijenhuis, Ellert, 281
1984  (Orwell), 109
non-W estern medicine, 76, 86, 207–8
norepinephrine, 29
North American Association for the Study of Obesity , 144
numbing, 14–15, 67, 71–73, 84, 87–89, 92, 99, 1 19, 124, 162–63, 198, 205, 247, 265–66, 273, 279,
304–5, 306
see also  freeze response (immobilization)
obesity , 144, 147, 162, 266
Ogden, Pat, 26, 96, 217–18
Olds, David, 167
On the Origin of Species  (Darwin), 74
oppositional defiant disorder (ODD), 150, 151, 157, 282, 392 n
orbital prefrontal cortex, 91
Or esteia  (Aeschylus), 332
Orr , Scott, 33
Orwell, Geor ge, 109
out-of-body experiences, 100, 132–33, 286, 386 n
oxytocin, 223
Packer , T ina, 330, 335, 345–46
“Pain in Men W ounded in Battle” (Beecher), 32–33
painkillers, 146, 349
panic attacks, 97, 172
Panksepp, Jaak, 334, 387 n,  398 n
paralysis, episodic, 228–29
paranoid schizophrenia, 15
parasympathetic nervous system (PNS), 77, 83–84, 264, 266–67
parent-child interactive therapy (PCIT), 215
parietal lobes, 91
Pascual-Leone, Alvaro, 417 n
Pasteur , Louis, 164
Patton, Geor ge, 186
Pavlov , Ivan, 39
Paxil, 35, 225, 254
PBSP psychomotor therapy , see  psychomotor therapy
Pearlman, Chester , 409 n
pendulation, 217–18, 245, 286, 333, 408 n
Peniston, Eugene, 326, 327
Pennebaker , James, 239–41, 243
performance enhancement, neurofeedback and, 322
periaqueductal gray , 102
Perry , Bruce, 56Perry , Chris, 138, 141, 296
Pesso, Albert, 297–99
pharmaceutical industry , power of, 374 n –75 n
pharmacological revolution, 27–29, 36–38, 310
profit motive in, 38
phobias, 256
physical actions, completion of, in trauma survivors, 96
physical activity:
calming ef fect of, 88
in trauma therapy , 207–8
physiology:
self-regulation of, 38
see also  body; brain
Piaget, Jean, 105
Pilates, 199
Pitman, Roger , 30, 33, 222
placebo ef fect, 35
plane crashes, survivors of, 80
Plutarch, 334
pneumogastric nerve, see  vagus nerve
Pollak, Seth, 1 14
polyvagal theory , 77–78, 86
Por ges, Stephen, 77–78, 80, 83, 84–85, 86
positron emission tomography (PET), 39
Possibility Project, 335, 340–42
posterior cingulate, 90–91, 91
Posttraumatic Cognitions Inventory , 233
pranayama,  86, 270
prefrontal cortex, 59,  68–69, 102
executive function in, 62
see also  medial prefrontal cortex (MPFC)
prefrontal lobes, 254
Prince, Morton, 184
Principles of Psychology , The  (James), 277
prisons:
population of, 348
spending on, 168
prolactin, 223
propranolol, 225
proprioceptive (balance) system, 247
protagonists, in psychomotor therapy , 297, 300–302
proto-self, 94
Prozac (fluoxetine), 34–35, 37, 223, 262
PTSD and, 35–36, 225, 226, 254, 261
psychiatry:
drug-based approach of, 315, 349
socioeconomic factors ignored in, 348
psychoanalysis, 22, 184, 230–31see also  talk therapy (talking cure)
psychodynamic psychotherapy , 199
Psychology T oday ,  315
psychomotor therapy , 296–308
author ’ s experience in, 298–99
feeling safe in, 300, 301
protagonists in, 297, 300–302
structures in, 298–308
witnesses in, 297, 300, 301, 306
psychopharmacology , 20, 206
psychotherapy , of child neglect survivors, 296–97
psychotropic drugs, 27–29, 37–38, 101, 136, 315, 349–50
PTSD and, 254, 261, 405 n
in trauma recovery , 223–27
see also  specific drugs
PTSD (posttraumatic stress disorder):
acupuncture and acupressure in treatment of, 410 n –1 1 n
amygdala-MPFC imbalance in, 62–64
attention and concentration problems in, 31 1–12
brain scans of, 102, 347, 408 n
brain-wave patterns in, 31 1,  312
CBT and, 194, 220–21
children of parents with, 1 18–19
diagnosis of, 136–37, 142, 150, 156–57, 188, 319
dissociation in, 66–68
EMDR in treatment of, 248–49, 253–54
exposure therapy and, 256
flashbacks in, 72, 327
in Holocaust survivors, 1 18–19
HR V in, 267, 268
hypersensitivity to threat in, 102, 327, 408 n
language failure in, 244–45
MDMA in treatment of, 223–24
memory and, 175, 190
numbing in, 72–73, 99
psychotropic drugs and, 254, 261, 405 n
reliving in, 66–68, 180–81, 325
and security of attachment to caregiver , 1 19
sensory self-awareness in, 89–92
social engagement and, 102
substance abuse and, 327
yoga therapy for , 207, 228–29, 268–69
PTSD (posttraumatic stress disorder), of accident and disaster survivors, 41–43, 142–43, 348
EMDR and, 260
flashbacks in, 66–67, 68, 68,  196–98
hypersensivity to threat in, 45–47, 68
irritability and rage in, 68, 248–49
Lelog as, 177–78numbing in, 198
PTSD (posttraumatic stress disorder), of combat veterans, 1–2, 106, 348, 371 n
antipsychotic drugs and, 226–27
attention and concentration problems of, 312
CBT and, 194, 220–21
diagnosis of, 19–21
downside of medications for , 36–37
flashbacks in, 8, 13, 16, 227
hypersensitivity to threat in, 1 1, 327
hypnosis and, 187, 220
in-or -out construct in, 18
irritability and rage in, 10, 14
neurofeedback and, 326–28
nightmares in, 8, 9, 14, 15, 134–35
numbing in, 14–15
pain and, 33
prevalence of, 20
Prozac and, 35–36, 226
serotonin levels in, 33–34, 36
shame in, 13
shell-shock as, 1 1, 184–85
sleep disorders in, 409 n
stress hormone levels in, 30
suicide and, 17, 332
theater as therapy for , 331–32, 343–44
traumatic event as sole source of meaning in, 18
V A and, 19, 187–88, 222–23
yoga therapy for , 270
PTSD scores, 254, 319, 324
Puk, Gerald, 252–53
purpose, sense of, 14, 92, 233
Putnam, Frank, 30, 161–64, 251
qigong, 86, 208, 245, 264
quantitative EEG (qEEG), 323
rage, 83
displacement of, 133–34, 140
in PTSD, 10, 14, 68, 248–49
in trauma survivors, 46, 95, 99, 285, 304
“railway spine,” 177
rape, 1–2, 17, 88, 213–14
increased incidence of, in survivors of childhood abuse, 85, 146–47
prevalence of, 20–21
rational brain, 55, 57–58
balance between emotional brain and, 64–65, 129–30, 205, 310
feelings and, 205Rauch, Scott, 40, 42
reactive attachment disorder , 150, 151
reciprocity , 79–80
reckless behavior , 120
reenacting, 31–33, 179, 180, 181, 182
relationships:
emotional brain and, 122
mental health and, 38, 55
in trauma recovery , 210–13
see also  intimacy; social engagement
reliving, 66–68, 180–81
Relman, Arnold, 374 n –75 n
Remarque, Erich Maria, 171, 186
Rembrandt van Rijn, 215
Remembering, Repeating and W orking Thr ough  (Freud), 219
REM sleep, 260–61, 309–10, 409 n
repressed memory , 183, 184–99
of childhood sexual abuse survivors, 190, 397 n
false memories and, 189, 190, 191–92
reliability of, 191
see also  traumatic memory
Research Domain Criteria (RDoC), 165–66
resilience, 105, 109, 161, 278–79, 314, 316, 351, 355, 356
Respiridol, 215
rhesus monkeys:
peer -raised, 154
personality types in, 153
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), IFS in treatment of, 291–92
rhythmic movement, in trauma therapy , 85, 207, 208, 214, 242–43, 333–34, 349
right temporal lobe, 319, 324
Rilke, Rainer Maria, 87
Risperdal, 37, 226, 227
Ritalin, 107, 136
ritual, trauma recovery and, 331–32
Rivers, W . H. R., 189
road rage, 83
role-playing, in psychomotor therapy , 298–300
Rorschach test, 15–17, 35
Roy , Alec, 154
Rozelle, Deborah, 214
Rumi, 277
Rwanda genocide, 244
safety:
a fundamental to mental health, 351, 352
as lacking in childhood trauma survivors, 141, 213, 296, 301, 351
in trauma recovery , 204, 212, 270, 275, 300, 301, 349, 353trauma survivors’ distorted perception of, 79–80, 85, 96–97, 164, 270
Salpêtrière, La, 177–78, 178,  194
Saul, Noam, 51–53, 52,  58, 261
Saxe, Glenn, 1 19
Scentific American,  149
Schacter , Dan, 93
Schilder , Paul, 100
schizophrenia, 15, 22–23, 27, 29
genetics and, 151–52
schools, see  education system
Schwartz, Richard, 281, 282, 283, 289, 290, 291, 418 n
Science,  94–95
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 35, 36
see also  Prozac (fluoxetine)
Self:
disor ganized attachment and, 120
in IFS therapy , 224, 283–85, 288, 289, 305
in infants, 1 13
multiple aspects of, 280–95; see also  internal family systems (IFS) therapy
reestablishing ownership of, 203–4, 318
in trauma survivors, 166, 233, 247
self-awareness:
autobiographical self in, 236
sensory , 87–102, 206, 206,  208–9, 236, 237–38, 247, 273, 354, 376 n,  382 n,  408 n,  418 n
self-blame, in childhood sexual abuse survivors, 131, 132
self-compassion, 292
self-confidence, 205, 350
self-deceit, as source of suf fering, 1 1, 26–27
self-discovery , language and, 234–35
self-harming, 20, 25, 87, 138, 141, 158, 162, 172, 264, 266, 288–89, 316, 317
self-hatred, 134, 143, 158, 163, 279
self-leadership, 203, 280–95
self-nurture, 1 13
self-recognition, absence of, 105
self-regulation, 1 13, 158, 161, 207, 224, 300, 347–48, 354, 401
neurofeedback and, 313
yoga and, 271–72, 274 , 275
Seligman, Martin, 29–30
Semrad, Elvin, 1 1, 26, 237
sensation seeking, 266, 272
sensorimotor therapy , 96, 214–15, 217–18
sensory self-awareness, 87–102, 206, 206,  208–9, 236, 237–38, 247, 273, 347, 354, 376 n,  382 n,
408 n,  418 n
September 1 1, 2001, terrorist attacks, 51–53, 52
children as witnesses to, 1 19
therapies for trauma from, 230–31
Seroquel, 37, 101, 215, 226, 227
serotonin, 33, 153, 154, 262serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 215, 225
Servan-Schreiber , David, 304
Seven Pillars of W isdom  (Lawrence), 232
sexual promiscuity , 120, 285, 286
Shadick, Nancy , 291
Shakespeare, W illiam, 43, 230, 343–46, 355
Shakespeare & Company , 335, 343–46
Shakespeare in the Courts, 335, 336, 342–44
Shalev , Arieh, 30
shame, 13–14, 102, 132, 138, 174, 21 1, 300
Shanley , Paul, 171–74, 183, 191
Shapiro, Francine, 251
Shatan, Chaim, 19
shavasana,  271
shell-shock, 1 1, 184–85
Shell Shock in France  (Myers), 187
singing and chanting, in trauma recovery , 86, 214
“Singing Revolution,” 334
Sketches of W ar ,  331
Sky , Licia, 216–17
sleep disorders, 46, 95
EMDR and, 259–61
in PTSD, 409 n
REM sleep and, 260–61, 409 n
see also  nightmares
SMAR T (sensory motor arousal regulation treatment), 215
smoking, sur geon general’ s report on, 148
Social Brain, The  (Gazzaniga), 280–81
social engagement:
as basic human trait, 1 10, 166
PTSD and, 102
as response to threat, 80–81, 82,  88
in rhesus monkeys, 153–54
in trauma recovery , 204
trauma survivors and, 3, 62, 78–80, 84, 86, 161, 349
social support, for childhood trauma survivors, 167–68, 350
socioeconomic stress, disor ganized attachment and, 1 17–18
Solomon, Richard, 32
Solomon, Roger , 260
somatic experiencing, 217–18
Somme, Battle of the (1916), 185
soothing, arousal and, 1 13
Sophocles, 332
South Africa, 213–14, 333, 349
Southborough Report, shell-shock diagnosis rejected by , 185
Southwick, Steve, 30
Sowell, Nancy , 291
speech centers (brain), 42,  43Sperry , Roger , 51
Spinazzola, Joseph, 156, 339, 351
Spitzer , Robert, 142
Sroufe, Alan, 160–61, 166
Steel, Kathy , 281
Sterman, Barry , 315
Stern, Jessica, 7
Stickgold, Robert, 260, 261
stimuli:
adjustment to, 32
hypersensitivity to, see  threat, hypersensitivity to
Story of My Life, The  (Keller), 234
Strange Situation, 1 15
stress:
gene expression and, 152
immune function and, 240
see also  trauma
stress hormones, 30, 42, 46, 60, 61, 66–67, 158, 162, 217, 233
structural dissociation model, 281
structures, in psychomotor therapy , 298–308
subcortical brain structures, 95
submissiveness, 97, 218
subpersonalities, 280–95
substance abuse, 70, 120, 146, 151, 225, 266
neurofeedback and, 327–28
withdrawal and, 32, 327
suicidal behavior and thoughts, 24, 28, 88, 120, 138, 141, 146, 147, 150, 151, 154, 256, 287, 316,
332
suicide by cop, 182
Summit, Roland, 131, 136
Suomi, Stephen, 153–54, 160
superior temporal cortex, 386 n
sympathetic nervous system (SNS), 77, 82, 82,  209, 266–67
Szyf, Moshe, 152
tai chi, 207–8
talk therapy (talking cure), 22, 27, 36, 72, 181–82, 230–37, 253
experience vs. telling in, 235–36
T AQ, see  T raumatic Antecedents Questionaire (T AQ)
T avistock Clinic, 109
T eicher , Martin, 140, 149, 416 n
temporal lobe abnormalities, 416 n
temporal parietal junction, 100
tension, in trauma survivors, 100–101, 265–66
terrorism:
PTSD from, 348
see also  September 1 1, 2001, terrorist attackstestosterone, 163
thalamocortical networks, 417 n
thalamus, 60, 70–71, 176, 324
theater , in trauma recovery , 214, 330–32, 334–46, 355
conflict and, 335
emotions and, 335, 344–45
feeling safe in, 336–37
Theater of W ar , 332
Thematic Apperception T est (T A T), 106–7
therapists, in trauma recovery , 212–13, 244
theta waves, 321, 326, 417 n
Thorazine (chlorpromazine), 22–23
thoughts, physical sensations and, 209
threat:
confusion of safety and, 85, 97, 1 19, 164
hypersensitivity to, 2, 1 1, 17, 33, 45–47, 68, 84, 95, 102, 143, 158, 161, 163, 196–97, 225, 265,
310, 327, 328, 408 n
social engagement as response to, 80–81, 82,  88
whole-body response to, 53–55, 53,  60–62, 61
see also  fight/flight response; freeze response (immobilization)
time, sense of, 273
T ourette, Gilles de la, 177
trance (hypnagogic) states, 1 17, 187, 238, 302, 305, 326
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 417 n
trauma:
articulation of, 232–34
brain changes from, 2–3, 21, 59,  347
growing awareness of, 347
as most ur gent public health issue, 148, 149–50, 356
narratives of, 7, 43, 46, 70, 130, 135, 175, 176, 194, 219, 220, 231, 250, 252–53, 261–62; see also
traumatic memory
physiological changes from, 2–3, 21, 53, 53,  72
prevalence of, 1
reactivation of, 2
risk of, socioeconomic status and, 348
trauma, healing from, 203–29
animal therapy in, 80, 150–51, 213
ARC model in, 401 n
art and, 242–43
body therapies for , 3, 26, 72, 86, 89, 207–8, 215–17, 228–29, 245; see also  specific therapies
calming and relaxation techniques in, 131, 203–4; see also  breathing; mindfulness; yoga
CBT in, 182, 194, 220–21
community in, 213–14, 244, 331–34, 355
desensitization therapies in, 46–47, 73, 220, 222–23
EMDR therapy in, see  eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR)
emotional self-regulation in, 203–4, 206–8, 212, 353, 401 n
feeling safe in, 204, 212, 270, 275, 300, 301, 349, 353
focus in, 203, 347–48, 355giving up self-deceit in, 204
IFS therapy in, see  internal family systems (IFS) therapy
integrating traumatic memories in, 181, 219–20, 222, 228, 237, 279
language and, 230–47, 275–76
limbic system therapy in, 205–6
living in present as goal of, 204
mindfulness in, 207, 208–10, 224, 225, 269, 270
music in, 242–43, 349, 355
need to revisit trauma in, 204–5, 21 1
neurofeedback in, see  neurofeedback
professional therapists for , 212–13, 244
psychomotor therapy in, 296–308
reestablishing ownership of one’ s self as goal of, 204–5
relationships in, 204, 210–13
rhythmic movement and, 85, 207, 208, 214, 242–43, 333–34, 349
schools as resources for , 351–56
search for meaning in, 233–34
self-awareness in, 208, 235–38, 273, 347
self-leadership in, 203, 280–95
sensorimotor therapy in, 96, 214–15
singing and chanting in, 86, 214
talk therapy in, 230–37, 253
theater in, see  theater , in trauma recovery
writing and, 238–42
yoga in, 63, 86, 207, 225, 228–29, 231, 263–76
T rauma and Recovery  (Herman), 189
T rauma Center , 3–4, 72, 85, 86, 121, 122, 163–64, 166, 214–15, 228, 266, 269, 271, 340, 351
neurofeedback laboratory at, 318–20, 324
T rauma Drama program of, 335, 336–37, 339, 355
Urban Improv study of, 338–39
T rauma Clinic, 35, 251, 253
trauma survivors:
alexithymia in, 98–99, 247, 272–73, 291, 319
blaming in, 45
brain scans of, 39–47, 42,  66, 68–70, 68,  71–72, 72,  82, 99–100, 319
brain-wave patterns in, 31 1–12, 31 1,  324
continued stress mobilization in, 53–55, 53
denial in, 46, 291
depersonalization in, 71–73, 71,  99–100, 132–33, 286, 291, 386 n,  401 n
derealization in, 401 n
dissociation in, 66–68, 95, 172, 179, 180–81, 194, 21 1, 247, 281, 294, 316, 317–18
distorted perception of safety in, 79–80, 85, 96–97, 1 19, 164, 270
fear of emotions in, 335
fear of experimentation in, 305
flashbacks in, 40, 42, 45, 70, 176, 193–94, 219
freeze response (immobilization) in, 54, 54,  80, 82–83, 82,  85, 95, 217, 218
handwriting of, 241–42
helplessness of, 217, 341hypersensitivity to threat in, 2, 61–62, 84
immune systems of, 126–27, 291
inner void in, 296–308
intimacy as dif ficult for , 99
irritability and rage in, 46, 95, 99
language failure in, 43–44, 243–45, 352–53
limbic system in, 59,  95, 265
living in present as dif ficult for , 67, 70, 73, 312
loss of imagination in, 17, 96
loss of purpose in, 92, 233
medication and, 3
memory and attention problems in, 46
nightmares in, 44
numbing in, 67, 84, 1 19, 205, 247, 272, 304–5, 306
panic attacks in, 97
polarization of self-system in, 281
reciprocity and, 79–80
reenacting in, 31–33, 179, 180, 181, 182
self-harming in, 266, 288–89
self-protective strategies of, 278–79
sensation seeking in, 266, 272
sense of self in, 166, 233, 247
sense of time in, 273
sensory overload in, 70–71
sensory self-awareness in, 89, 96, 247, 418 n
shame in, 102, 138, 21 1, 300
sleep disorders in, 46, 95
social engagement and, 3, 62, 78–80, 84, 86, 161, 349
somatic symptoms in, 97–98
stress hormone levels in, 30
substance abuse by , 70, 120, 146, 151, 225, 266
tension and defensiveness in, 100–101, 265–66
trust as dif ficult for , 18, 134, 141, 150, 158, 163, 253
see also  childhood trauma survivors; PTSD (posttraumatic stress disorder)
T raumatic Antecedents Questionaire (T AQ), 138–40, 141
traumatic memory , 171–83, 246–47, 278
as disor ganized, 193
hysteria as, see  hysteria
integration of, 181, 219–20, 222, 228, 237, 255–56, 261–62, 279, 308
narrative memory vs., 176, 179, 194, 219, 231–32, 236
normal memory vs., 175–76, 180, 181, 189, 192–94, 219, 372 n
“railway spine” as, 177
see also  repressed memory
T raumatic Neur oses of W ar , The  (Kardiner), 1 1, 187
T revarthen, Colwyn, 1 1 1
T rickett, Penelope, 161–63
triggered responses, 66–68
T ronick, Ed, 84, 1 12trust, dif ficulty of, 18, 134, 141, 150, 158, 163, 253
T ruth and Reconciliation Commission, 213–14, 333, 349
T utu, Desmond, 333
Ubuntu,  349
United States Association for Body Psychotherapy , 297
Urban Improv , 334–35
T rauma Center study of, 337–39
vagus nerve, 76, 78, 80–82, 81,  207, 245
V alium, 225
valproate, 136, 225, 405 n
van der Hart, Onno, 281, 396 n
V an der Kolk Center , 213, 401 n
vasopressin, 223
ventral vagal complex (VVC), 81–82, 
 82,  83–84
development of, 84
V ersailles, T reaty of (1919), 186
V eterans Administration (V A):
Boston Clinic of, 7, 10, 1 1, 12, 187–88, 227, 331
PTSD and, 19, 222–23, 226–27, 244–45
V eterans Af fairs Department, U.S, 156, 224, 255
V ietnam veterans, 7–8, 12, 15, 17–18, 33, 156, 182, 187–88, 190, 222–23, 227, 233–34
visual cortex, 42,  44
voice, responses to, 85–86
W alter Reed National Military Medical Center , 322
W ar Is a For ce That Gives Us Meaning  (Hedges), 31
W arner , Liz, 214, 418
W arren, Robert Penn, 22
W erner , Emily , 392 n
“What Is an Emotion?” (James), 89–90
What It Is Like to Go to W ar  (Marlantes), 233
“When the Patient Reports Atrocities” (Haley), 13
W iesel, Elie, 356
W illiams, Dar , 203
W illiams, Linda Meyer , 190–91
W ilson, Scott, 126
W infrey , Oprah, 356
W innicott, Donald, 109, 1 13–14
witnesses, in psychomotor therapy , 297, 300, 301, 306
W oodman, Marion, 230
W orld Enough and T ime  (W arren), 22
W orld I Live In, The  (Keller), 235
W orld W ar I, 243–44
shell-shock in, 1 1, 184–86, 189W orld W ar II, 9, 210
combat trauma in, 187–88
veterans of, 18, 53, 187, 188
writing, in trauma recovery , 238–42
Xanax, 225
Y ale University , Fortunof f V ideo Archive at, 195
Y ehuda, Rachel, 30, 1 18
yoga, 63, 86, 231, 263–76, 354
asanas  (postures) in, 270, 272
clinical studies of, 273–75, 274
HR V and, 268–69, 271
interoception and, 272–74
meditation in, 270
pranayama  (breathing) in, 
 86, 270
PTSD and, 207, 228–29, 268–69, 270
self-regulation and, 271–72, 274, 275
Y oga and the Quest for the T rue Self  (Cope), 263, 272
Zaichkowsky , Len, 322
Zoloft, 35, 225, 254
Zyprexa, 37, 101First published in July 2021.
New Enterprise House
St Helens Street
Derby
DE1 3GY
UK
email:  gareth.icke@davidicke.com
Copyright © 2021 David Icke
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form without permission from the
Publisher , except for the quotation of brief passages in criticism
Cover Design:  Gareth Icke
Book Design:  Neil Hague
British Library Cataloguing-in
Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is
av ailable from the British Library
eISBN 978-18384153-1-0D e d i c a t i o n :
To  Freeeeeedom!Renegade:
Adjectiv e
‘Having rejected tradition: Unconv entional.’
Merriam-Webster DictionaryAcquiescence to tyranny is the death of the spirit
Y ou may be 38 y ears old, as I happen to be. And one day ,
some great opportunity stands before y ou and calls y ou to
stand up for some great principle, some great issue, some
great cause. And y ou refuse to do it because y ou are afraid
… Y ou refuse to do it because y ou w ant to liv e longer …
Y ou’ re afraid that y ou will lose y our job, or y ou are afraid
that y ou will be criticised or that y ou will lose y our
popularity , or y ou’ re afraid that somebody will stab y ou, or
shoot at y ou or bomb y our house; so y ou refuse to take the
stand.
W ell, y ou may go on and liv e until y ou are 90, but y ou’ re just
as dead at 38 as y ou w ould be at 90. And the cessation of
breathing in y our life is but the belated announcement of an
earlier death of the spirit.
Martin Luther KingHow the few control the many and always have – the many do
whatever they’re told
‘Forw ard, the Light Brigade!’
W as there a man dismay ed?
Not though the soldier knew
Someone had blundered.
Theirs not to make reply ,
Theirs not to reason why ,
Theirs but to do and die.
Into the v alley of Death
Rode the six hundred.
Cannon to right of them,
Cannon to le  of them,
Cannon in front of them
V olley ed and thundered;
Stormed at with shot and shell,
Boldly they rode and w ell,
Into the jaws of Death,
Into the mouth of hell
Rode the six hundred
Alfred Lord Tennyson (1809-1892) 
The mist is li ing slowly
I can see the w ay ahead
And I’v e le  behind the empty streets
That once inspired my life
And the strength of the emotion
Is like thunder in the air
’Cos the promise that w e made each other
Haunts me to the end
The secret of y our beauty
And the mystery of y our soul
I’v e been searching for in ev ery one I meet
And the times I’v e been mistaken
It’ s impossible to say
And the grass is growing
Underneath our feet
The w ords that I remember
From my childhood still are true
That there’ s none so blind
As those who will not see
And to those who lack the courage
And say it’ s dangerous to try
W ell they just don’ t know
That lov e eternal will not be denied
I know y ou’ re out there somewhere
Somewhere, somewhere
I know y ou’ re out there somewhereSomewhere y ou can hear my v oice
I know I’ll ﬁnd y ou somehow
Somehow , somehow
I know I’ll ﬁnd y ou somehow
And somehow I’ll return again to y ou
The Moody BluesAre you a gutless wonder - or a Renegade Mind?
Monuments put from pen to paper ,
T urns me into a gutless w onder ,
And if y ou tolerate this,
Then y our children will be next.
Gravity keeps my head down,
Or is it maybe shame ...
Manic Street Preachers
 
Rise like lions a er slumber
In unv anquishable number .
Shake y our chains to earth like dew
Which in sleep hav e fallen on y ou.
Y e are many – they are few .
Percy ShelleyCHAPTER 1
CHAPTER 2
CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4
CHAPTER 5
CHAPTER 6
CHAPTER 7
CHAPTER 8
CHAPTER 9
CHAPTER 10
CHAPTER 11
CHAPTER 12
Postscript
APPENDIX
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEXC o n t e n t s
‘I’m thinking’ – Oh, but are you?
Renegade perception
The Pushbacker sting
‘Covid’: The calculated catastrophe
There is no ‘virus’
Sequence of deceit
War on your mind
‘Reframing’ insanity
We must have it? So what is it?
Human 2.0
Who controls the Cult?
Escaping Wetiko
 
 
Cowan-Kaufman-Morell Statement on Virus Isolation
 
 FCHAPTER ONE
I’m thinking’ – Oh, but are you?
Think for yourself and let others enjoy the privilege of doing so too
Voltaire
rench-born philosopher , mathematician and scientist René
Descartes became famous for his statement in Latin in the 17th
century which translates into English as: ‘I think, therefore I am.’
On the face of it that is true. Thought reﬂects perception and
perception leads to both behaviour and self-identity . In that sense
‘w e’ are what w e think. But who or what is doing the thinking and is
thinking the only route to perception? Clearly , as w e shall see, ‘w e’
are not alw ays the source of ‘our ’ perception, indeed with regard to
humanity as a whole this is rarely the case; and thinking is far from
the only means of perception. Thought is the village idiot compared
with other expressions of consciousness that w e all hav e the
potential to access and tap into. This has to be true when w e are
those other expressions of consciousness which are inﬁnite in nature.
W e hav e forgo en this, or , more to the point, been manipulated to
forget.
These are not just the esoteric musings of the nav el. The whole
foundation of human control and oppression is control of
perception. Once perception is hĳacked then so is behaviour which
is dictated by perception. Collectiv e perception becomes collectiv e
behaviour and collectiv e behaviour is what w e call human society .
P erception is all and those behind human control know that which iswhy perception is the target 24/7 of the psychopathic manipulators
that I call the Global Cult. They know that if they dictate perception
they will dictate behaviour and collectiv ely dictate the nature of
human society . They are further aw are that perception is formed
from information receiv ed and if they control the circulation of
information they will to a v ast extent direct human behaviour .
Censorship of information and opinion has become globally Nazi-
like in recent y ears and nev er more blatantly than since the illusory
‘virus pandemic’ w as triggered out of China in 2019 and across the
w orld in 2020. Why hav e billions submi ed to house arrest and
accepted fascistic societies in a w ay they w ould hav e nev er believ ed
possible? Those controlling the information spewing from
gov ernment, mainstream media and Silicon V alley (all controlled by
the same Global Cult netw orks) told them they w ere in danger from
a ‘deadly virus’ and only by submi ing to house arrest and
conceding their most basic of freedoms could they and their families
be protected. This monumental and prov able lie became the
perception  of the billions and therefore the behaviour  of the billions. In
those few w ords y ou hav e the whole structure and modus operandi
of human control. Fear is a perception – F alse E motion A ppearing
R eal – and fear is the currency of control. In short … get them by the
balls (or giv e them the impression that y ou hav e) and their hearts
and minds will follow . Nothing grips the dangly bits and freezes the
rear -end more comprehensiv ely than fear .
World number 1
There are tw o ‘w orlds’ in what appears to be one ‘w orld’ and the
prime diﬀerence betw een them is knowledge. First w e hav e the mass
of human society in which the population is maintained in coldly-
calculated ignorance through control of information and the
‘education’ (indoctrination) system. That’ s all y ou really need to
control to enslav e billions in a perceptual delusion in which what are
perceiv ed to be their  thoughts and opinions are ev er -repeated
mantras that the system has been downloading all their liv es
through ‘education’, media, science, medicine, politics and academiain which the personnel and adv ocates are themselv es
ov erwhelmingly the perceptual products of the same repetition.
T eachers and academics in general are processed by the same
programming machine as ev ery one else, but unlike the great
majority they nev er leav e the ‘education’ program. It gripped them
as students and continues to grip them as programmers of
subsequent generations of students. The programmed become the
programmers – the programmed programmers. The same can
largely be said for scientists, doctors and politicians and not least
because as the American writer Upton Sinclair said: ‘It is diﬃcult to
get a man to understand something when his salary depends upon
his not understanding it.’ If y our career and income depend on
thinking the w ay the system demands then y ou will – bar a few free-
minded exceptions – concede y our mind to the P erceptual
Mainframe that I call the P ostage Stamp Consensus. This is a tiny
band of perceiv ed knowledge and possibility ‘taught’ (downloaded)
in the schools and univ ersities, pounded out by the mainstream
media and on which all gov ernment policy is founded. T ry thinking,
and especially speaking and acting, outside of the ‘box’ of consensus
and see what that does for y our career in the Mainstream Ev erything
which bullies, harasses, intimidates and ridicules the population into
compliance. Here w e hav e the simple structure which enslav es most
of humanity in a perceptual prison cell for an entire lifetime and I’ll
go deeper into this process shortly . Most of what humanity is taught
as fact is nothing more than programmed belief. American science
ﬁction author Frank Herbert w as right when he said: ‘Belief can be
manipulated. Only knowledge is dangerous.’ In the ‘Covid’ age
belief is promoted and knowledge is censored. It w as alw ays so, but
nev er to the extreme of today .
World number 2
A ‘number 2’ is slang for ‘doing a poo’ and how appropriate that is
when this other ‘w orld’ is doing just that on humanity ev ery minute
of ev ery day . W orld number 2 is a global netw ork of secret societies
and semi-secret groups dictating the direction of society viagov ernments, corporations and authorities of ev ery kind. I hav e
spent more than 30 y ears uncov ering and exposing this netw ork that
I call the Global Cult and knowing its agenda is what has made my
books so accurate in predicting current and past ev ents. Secret
societies are secret for a reason. They w ant to keep their hoarded
knowledge to themselv es and their chosen initiates and to hide it
from the population which they seek through ignorance to control
and subdue. The whole foundation of the division betw een W orld 1
and W orld 2 is knowledge . What number 1 knows number 2 must not.
Knowledge they hav e w orked so hard to keep secret includes (a) the
agenda to enslav e humanity in a centrally-controlled global
dictatorship, and (b) the nature of reality and life itself. The la er (b)
must be suppressed to allow the former (a) to prev ail as I shall be
explaining. The w ay the Cult manipulates and interacts with the
population can be likened to a spider ’ s w eb. The ‘spider ’ sits at the
centre in the shadows and imposes its will through the w eb with
each strand represented in W orld number 2 by a secret society ,
satanic or semi-secret group, and in W orld number 1 – the w orld of
the seen – by gov ernments, agencies of gov ernment, law
enforcement, corporations, the banking system, media
conglomerates and Silicon V alley ( Fig 1  ov erleaf ). The spider and the
w eb connect and coordinate all these organisations to pursue the
same global outcome while the population sees them as individual
entities w orking randomly and independently . At the lev el of the
w eb gov ernments are  the banking system are  the corporations are  the
media are  Silicon V alley are  the W orld Health Organization w orking
from their inner cores as one unit. Apparently unconnected
countries, corporations, institutions, organisations and people are on
the same team  pursuing the same global outcome. Strands in the w eb
immediately around the spider are the most secretiv e and exclusiv e
secret societies and their membership is emphatically restricted to
the Cult inner -circle emerging through the generations from
particular bloodlines for reasons I will come to. At the core of the
core y ou w ould get them in a single room. That’ s how many people
are dictating the direction of human society and its transformationthrough the ‘Covid’ hoax and other means. As the w eb expands out
from the spider w e meet the secret societies that many people will be
aw are of – the Freemasons, Knights T emplar , Knights of Malta, Opus
Dei, the inner sanctum of the Jesuit Order , and such like. Note how
many are connected to the Church of Rome and there is a reason for
that. The Roman Church w as established as a rev amp, a rebranding,
of the relocated ‘Church’ of Babylon and the Cult imposing global
tyranny today can be tracked back to Babylon and Sumer in what is
now Iraq.
Figure 1: The global web through which the few control the many. (Image Neil Hague.)
Inner lev els of the w eb operate in the unseen aw ay from the public
ey e and then w e hav e what I call the cusp organisations located at
the point where the hidden meets the seen. They include a series of
satellite organisations answ ering to a secret society founded in
London in the late 19th century called the Round T able and among
them are the Roy al Institute of International Aﬀairs (UK, founded in
1920); Council on Foreign Relations (US, 1921); Bilderberg Group
(w orldwide, 1954); T rilateral Commission (US/w orldwide, 1972); and
the Club of Rome (w orldwide, 1968) which w as created to exploit
environmental concerns to justify the centralisation of global pow er
to ‘sav e the planet’. The Club of Rome instigated with others the
human-caused climate change hoax which has led to all the ‘greennew deals’ demanding that v ery centralisation of control. Cusp
organisations, which include endless ‘think tanks’ all ov er the w orld,
are designed to coordinate a single global policy betw een political
and business leaders, intelligence personnel, media organisations
and any one who can inﬂuence the direction of policy in their own
sphere of operation. Major play ers and regular a enders will know
what is happening – or some of it – while others come and go and
are kept ov erwhelmingly in the dark about the big picture. I refer to
these cusp groupings as semi-secret in that they can be publicly
identiﬁed, but what goes on at the inner -core is kept v ery much ‘in
house’ ev en from most of their members and participants through a
ﬁercely-imposed system of compartmentalisation. Only let them
know what they need to know to serv e y our interests and no more.
The structure of secret societies serv es as a perfect example of this
principle. Most Freemasons nev er get higher than the bo om three
lev els of ‘degree’ (degree of knowledge) when there are 33 oﬃcial
degrees of the Sco ish Rite. Initiates only qualify for the next higher
‘compartment’ or degree if those at that lev el choose to allow them.
Knowledge can be carefully assigned only to those considered ‘safe’.
I w ent to my local Freemason’ s lodge a few y ears ago when they
w ere having an ‘open day’ to show how cuddly they w ere and when
I cha ed to some of them I w as astonished at how li le the rank and
ﬁle knew ev en about the most ubiquitous symbols they use. The
mushroom technique – keep them in the dark and feed them bullshit
– applies to most people in the w eb as w ell as the population as a
whole. Sub-divisions of the w eb mirror in theme and structure
transnational corporations which hav e a headquarters somewhere in
the w orld dictating to all their subsidiaries in diﬀerent countries.
Subsidiaries operate in their methodology and branding to the same
centrally-dictated plan and policy in pursuit of particular ends. The
Cult w eb functions in the same w ay . Each country has its own w eb
as a subsidiary of the global one. They consist of netw orks of secret
societies, semi-secret groups and bloodline families and their job is
to impose the will of the spider and the global w eb in their particular
country . Subsidiary netw orks control and manipulate the national
political system, ﬁnance, corporations, media, medicine, etc. toensure that they follow the globally-dictated Cult agenda. These
netw orks w ere the means through which the ‘Covid’ hoax could be
play ed out with almost ev ery country responding in the same w ay .
The ‘Yessir’ pyramid
Compartmentalisation is the key to understanding how a tiny few
can dictate the liv es of billions when combined with a top-down
sequence of imposition and acquiescence. The inner core of the Cult
sits at the peak of the pyramidal hierarchy of human society ( Fig 2
ov erleaf ). It imposes its will – its agenda for the w orld – on the lev el
immediately below which acquiesces to that imposition. This lev el
then imposes the Cult will on the lev el below them which acquiesces
and imposes on the next lev el. V ery quickly w e meet lev els in the
hierarchy that hav e no idea there ev en is a Cult, but the sequence of
imposition and acquiescence continues down the pyramid in just the
same w ay . ‘I don’ t know why w e are doing this but the order came
from “on-high” and so w e be er just do it.’ Alfred Lord T ennyson
said of the cannon fodder lev els in his poem The Charge of the Light
Brigade : ‘Theirs not to reason why; theirs but to do and die.’ The next
line says that ‘into the v alley of death rode the six hundred’ and they
died because they obey ed without question what their perceiv ed
‘superiors’ told them to do. In the same w ay the population
capitulated to ‘Covid’. The whole hierarchical pyramid functions
like this to allow the v ery few to direct the enormous many .
Ev entually imposition-acquiescence-imposition-acquiescence comes
down to the mass of the population at the foot of the pyramid. If
they acquiesce to those lev els of the hierarchy imposing on them
(gov ernments/law enforcement/doctors/media) a circuit is
completed betw een the population and the handful of super -
psychopaths in the Cult inner core at the top of the pyramid.
W ithout a circuit-breaking refusal to obey , the sequence of
imposition and acquiescence allows a staggeringly few people to
impose their will upon the entirety of humankind. W e are looking at
the v ery sequence that has subjugated billions since the start of 2020.
Our freedom has not been taken from us. Humanity has giv en itaw ay . Fascists do not impose fascism because there are not enough
of them. Fascism is imposed by the population acquiescing to
fascism. Put another w ay allowing their perceptions to be
programmed to the extent that leads to the population giving their
freedom aw ay by giving their perceptions – their mind – aw ay . If this
circuit is not broken by humanity ceasing to cooperate with their
own enslav ement then nothing can change. For that to happen
people hav e to critically think and see through the lies and window
dressing and then summon the backbone to act upon what they see.
The Cult spends its days w orking to stop either happening and its
methodology is systematic and highly detailed, but it can be
ov ercome and that is what this book is all about.
Figure 2: The simple sequence of imposition and compliance that allows a handful of people
at the peak of the pyramid to dictate the lives of billions.
The Life Program
Okay , back to w orld number 1 or the w orld of the ‘masses’. Observ e
the process of what w e call ‘life’ and it is a perceptual download
from cradle to grav e. The Cult has created a global structure in
which perception can be programmed and the program continually
topped-up with what appears to be constant conﬁrmation that the
program is indeed true reality . The important w ord here is ‘appears’.This is the structure, the ﬂy-trap, the P ostage Stamp Consensus or
P erceptual Mainframe, which represents that incredibly narrow
band of perceiv ed possibility deliv ered by the ‘education’ system,
mainstream media, science and medicine. From the earliest age the
download begins with parents who hav e themselv es succumbed to
the v ery programming their children are about to go through. Most
parents don’ t do this out of malev olence and mostly it is quite the
opposite. They do what they believ e is best for their children and
that is what the program has told them is best. W ithin three or four
y ears comes the major transition from parental programming to full-
blown state (Cult) programming in school, college and univ ersity
where perceptually-programmed teachers and academics pass on
their programming to the next generations. T eachers who resist are
soon marginalised and their careers ended while children who resist
are called a problem child for whom Ritalin may need to be
prescribed. A few y ears a er entering the ‘w orld’ children are under
the control of authority ﬁgures representing the state telling them
when they hav e to be there, when they can leav e and when they can
speak, eat, ev en go to the toilet. This is calculated preparation for a
lifetime of obeying authority in all its forms. Reﬂex-action fear of
authority is instilled by authority from the start. Children soon learn
the carrot and stick consequences of obeying or defying authority
which is underpinned daily for the rest of their life. Fortunately I
daydreamed through this crap and nev er obey ed authority simply
because it told me to. This approach to my alleged ‘be ers’ continues
to this day . There can be consequences of pursuing open-minded
freedom in a w orld of closed-minded conformity . I spent a lot of time
in school corridors a er being ejected from the classroom for not
taking some of it seriously and now I spend a lot of time being
ejected from Facebook, Y ouT ube and T wi er . But I can tell y ou that
being true to y ourself and not compromising y our self-respect is far
more exhilarating than bowing to authority for authority’ s sake. Y ou
don’ t hav e to be a sheep to the shepherd (authority) and the sheep
dog (fear of not obeying authority).The perceptual download continues throughout the formativ e
y ears in school, college and univ ersity while script-reading
‘teachers’, ‘academics’ ‘scientists’, ‘doctors’ and ‘journalists’ insist
that ongoing generations must be as programmed as they are.
Accept the program or y ou will not pass y our ‘exams’ which conﬁrm
y our ‘degree’ of programming. It is tragic to think that many parents
pressure their oﬀspring to w ork hard at school to download the
program and qualify for the next stage at college and univ ersity . The
late, great, American comedian George Carlin said: ‘Here’ s a bumper
sticker I’ d like to see: W e are proud parents of a child who has
resisted his teachers’ a empts to break his spirit and bend him to the
will of his corporate masters.’ W ell, the best of luck ﬁnding many of
those, George. Then comes the moment to leav e the formal
programming y ears in academia and enter the ‘adult’ w orld of w ork.
There y ou meet others in y our chosen or prescribed arena who w ent
through the same P ostage Stamp Consensus program before y ou
did. There is therefore ov erwhelming agreement betw een almost
ev ery one on the basic foundations of P ostage Stamp reality and the
rejection, ev en contempt, of the few who hav e a mind of their own
and are prepared to use it. This has tw o major eﬀects. Firstly , the
consensus conﬁrms to the programmed that their download is really
how things are. I mean, ev ery one knows that, right? Secondly , the
arrogance and ignorance of P ostage Stamp adherents ensure that
any one questioning the program will hav e unpleasant consequences
for seeking their own truth and not picking their perceptions from
the shelf marked: ‘Things y ou must believ e without question and if
y ou don’ t y ou’ re a dangerous lunatic conspiracy theorist and a
harebrained nu er ’.
Ev ery gov ernment, agency and corporation is founded on the
same P ostage Stamp prison cell and y ou can see why so many
people believ e the same thing while calling it their own ‘opinion’.
Fusion of gov ernments and corporations in pursuit of the same
agenda w as the deﬁnition of fascism described by Italian dictator
Benito Mussolini. The pressure to conform to perceptual norms
downloaded for a lifetime is incessant and inﬁltrates society rightdown to family groups that become censors and condemners of their
own ‘black sheep’ for not, ironically , being sheep. W e hav e seen an
explosion of that in the ‘Covid’ era. Cult-owned global media
unleashes its propaganda all day ev ery day in support of the P ostage
Stamp and targets with abuse and ridicule any one in the public ey e
who w on’ t bend their mind to the will of the tyranny . Any response
to this is denied (certainly in my case). They don’ t w ant to giv e a
platform to expose oﬃcial lies. Cult-owned-and-created Internet
giants like Facebook, Google, Y ouT ube and T wi er delete y ou for
having an unapprov ed opinion. Facebook boasts that its AI censors
delete 97-percent of ‘hate speech’ before any one ev en reports it.
Much of that ‘hate speech’ will simply be an opinion that Facebook
and its masters don’ t w ant people to see. Such perceptual oppression
is widely known as fascism. Ev en Facebook executiv e Benny
Thomas, a ‘CEO Global Planning Lead’, said in comments secretly
recorded by inv estigativ e journalism operation Project V eritas that
Facebook is ‘too pow erful’ and should be broken up:
I mean, no king in history has been the ruler of two billion people, but Mark Zuckerberg is …
And he’s 36. That’s too much for a 36-year-old ... You should not have power over two billion
people. I just think that’s wrong.
Thomas said Facebook-owned platforms like Instagram, Oculus, and
WhatsApp needed to be separate companies. ‘It’ s too much pow er
when they’ re all one together ’. That’ s the w ay the Cult likes it,
how ev er . W e hav e an executiv e of a Cult organisation in Benny
Thomas that doesn’ t know there is a Cult such is the
compartmentalisation. Thomas said that Facebook and Google ‘are
no longer companies, they’ re countries’. Actually they are more
pow erful than countries on the basis that if y ou control information
y ou control perception and control human society .
I love my oppressor
Another expression of this psychological trickery is for those who
realise they are being pressured into compliance to ev entually•
•
•
•
•
•convince themselv es to believ e the oﬃcial narrativ es to protect their
self-respect from accepting the truth that they hav e succumbed to
meek and subservient compliance. Such people become some of the
most v ehement defenders of the system. Y ou can see them
ev erywhere screaming abuse at those who prefer to think for
themselv es and by doing so reminding the compliers of their own
capitulation to conformity . ‘Y ou are talking dangerous nonsense y ou
Covidiot!!’ Are y ou trying to convince me or y ourself ? It is a potent
form of Stockholm syndrome which is deﬁned as: ‘ A psychological
condition that occurs when a victim of abuse identiﬁes and a aches,
or bonds, positiv ely with their abuser .’ An example is hostages
bonding and ev en ‘falling in lov e’ with their kidnappers. The
syndrome has been observ ed in domestic violence, abused children,
concentration camp inmates, prisoners of w ar and many and v arious
Satanic cults. These are some traits of Stockholm syndrome listed at
goodtherapy .org:
 
P ositiv e regard tow ards perpetrators of abuse or captor [see
‘Covid’].
Failure to cooperate with police and other gov ernment authorities
when it comes to holding perpetrators of abuse or kidnapping
accountable [or in the case of ‘Covid’ cooperating with the police
to enforce and defend their captors’ demands].
Li le or no eﬀort to escape [see ‘Covid’].
Belief in the goodness of the perpetrators or kidnappers [see
‘Covid’].
Appeasement of captors. This is a manipulativ e strategy for
maintaining one’ s safety . As victims get rew arded – perhaps with
less abuse or ev en with life itself – their appeasing behaviours are
reinforced [see ‘Covid’].
Learned helplessness. This can be akin to ‘if y ou can’ t beat ‘em,
join ‘em’. As the victims fail to escape the abuse or captivity , they
may start giving up and soon realize it’ s just easier for ev ery one if
they acquiesce all their pow er to their captors [see ‘Covid’].•
•Feelings of pity tow ard the abusers, believing they are actually
victims themselv es. Because of this, victims may go on a crusade
or mission to ‘sav e’ [protect] their abuser [see the v enom
unleashed on those challenging the oﬃcial ‘Covid’ narrativ e].
Unwillingness to learn to detach from their perpetrators and heal.
In essence, victims may tend to be less loy al to themselv es than to
their abuser [ definitely  see ‘Covid’].
P onder on those traits and compare them with the behaviour of
great sw athes of the global population who hav e defended
gov ernments and authorities which hav e spent ev ery minute
destroying their liv es and liv elihoods and those of their children and
grandchildren since early 2020 with fascistic lockdowns, house arrest
and employment deletion to ‘protect’ them from a ‘deadly virus’ that
their abusers’ perceptually created to bring about this v ery outcome.
W e are looking at mass Stockholm syndrome. All those that agree to
concede their freedom will believ e those perceptions are originating
in their own independent ‘mind’ when in fact by conceding their
reality to Stockholm syndrome they hav e by deﬁnition conceded any
independence of mind. Listen to the ‘opinions’ of the acquiescing
masses in this ‘Covid’ era and what gushes forth is the repetition of
the oﬃcial v ersion of ev erything deliv ered unprocessed, unﬁltered
and unquestioned. The whole programming dynamic w orks this
w ay . I must be free because I’ m told that I am and so I think that I
am.
Y ou can see what I mean with the chapter theme of ‘I’ m thinking –
Oh, but are  y ou?’ The great majority are not thinking, let alone for
themselv es. They are repeating what authority has told them to
believ e which allows them to be controlled. W eaving through this
mentality is the fear that the ‘conspiracy theorists’ are right and this
again explains the o en hysterical abuse that ensues when y ou dare
to contest the oﬃcial narrativ e of anything. Denial is the mechanism
of hiding from y ourself what y ou don’ t w ant to be true. T elling
people what they w ant to hear is easy , but it’ s an inﬁnitely greater
challenge to tell them what they w ould rather not be happening.One is akin to pushing against an open door while the other is met
with v ehement resistance no ma er what the scale of evidence. I
don’ t w ant it to be true so I’ll convince myself that it’ s not. Examples
are ev erywhere from the denial that a partner is cheating despite all
the signs to the reﬂex-action rejection of any idea that w orld ev ents
in which country a er country act in exactly the same w ay are
centrally coordinated. T o accept the la er is to accept that a force of
unspeakable evil is w orking to destroy y our life and the liv es of y our
children with nothing too horriﬁc to achiev e that end. Who the heck
w ants that to be true? But if w e don’ t face reality the end is duly
achiev ed and the consequences are far w orse and ongoing than
breaking through the w alls of denial today with the courage to make
a stand against tyranny .
Connect the dots – but how?
A crucial aspect of perceptual programming is to portray a w orld in
which ev erything is random and almost nothing is connected to
anything else. Randomness cannot be coordinated by its v ery nature
and once y ou perceiv e ev ents as random the idea they could be
connected is w av ed aw ay as the rantings of the tinfoil-hat brigade.
Y ou can’ t plan and coordinate random y ou idiot! No, y ou can’ t, but
y ou can hide the coldly-calculated and long-planned behind the
illusion  of randomness. A foundation manifestation of the Renegade
Mind is to scan reality for pa erns that connect the apparently
random and turn pixels and dots into pictures. This is the w ay I
w ork and hav e done so for more than 30 y ears. Y ou look for
similarities in people, modus operandi and desired outcomes and
slowly , then ev er quicker , the picture forms. For instance: There
w ould seem to be no connection betw een the ‘Covid pandemic’ hoax
and the human-caused global-w arming hoax and y et they are masks
(appropriately) on the same face seeking the same outcome. Those
pushing the global w arming myth through the Club of Rome and
other Cult agencies are driving the lies about ‘Covid’ – Bill Gates is
an obvious one, but they are endless. Why w ould the same people be
inv olv ed in both when they are clearly not connected? Oh, but theyare . Common themes with personnel are matched by common goals.
The ‘solutions’ to both ‘problems’ are centralisation of global pow er
to impose the will of the few on the many to ‘sav e’ humanity from
‘Covid’ and sav e the planet from an ‘existential threat’ (w e need
‘zero Covid’ and ‘zero carbon emissions’). These, in turn, connect
with the ‘dot’ of globalisation which w as coined to describe the
centralisation of global pow er in ev ery area of life through incessant
political and corporate expansion, trading blocks and superstates
like the European Union. If y ou are the few and y ou w ant to control
the many y ou hav e to centralise pow er and decision-making. The
more y ou centralise pow er the more pow er the few at the centre will
hav e ov er the many; and the more that pow er is centralised the more
pow er those at the centre hav e to centralise ev en quicker . The
momentum of centralisation gets faster and faster which is exactly
the process w e hav e witnessed. In this w ay the hoaxed ‘pandemic’
and the fakery of human-caused global w arming serv e the interests
of globalisation and the seizure of global pow er in the hands of the
Cult inner -circle which is behind ‘Covid’, ‘climate change’ and
globalisation. At this point random ‘dots’ become a clear and
obvious picture or pa ern.
Klaus Schw ab, the classic Bond villain who founded the Cult’ s
Gates-funded W orld Economic Forum, published a book in 2020, The
Great Reset , in which he used the ‘problem’ of ‘Covid’ to justify a
total transformation of human society to ‘sav e’ humanity from
‘climate change’. Schw ab said: ‘The pandemic represents a rare but
narrow window of opportunity to reﬂect, reimagine, and reset our
w orld.’ What he didn’ t mention is that the Cult he serv es is behind
both hoaxes as I show in my book The Answer . He and the Cult don’ t
hav e to reimagine the w orld. They know precisely what they w ant
and that’ s why they destroy ed human society with ‘Covid’ to ‘build
back be er ’ in their grand design. Their job is not to imagine, but to
get humanity to imagine and agree with their plans while believing
it’ s all random. It must be pure coincidence that ‘The Great Reset’
has long been the Cult’ s code name for the global imposition of
fascism and replaced previous code-names of the ‘New W orldOrder ’ used by Cult frontmen like Father George Bush and the ‘New
Order of the Ages’ which emerged from Freemasonry and much
older secret societies. New Order of the Ages appears on the rev erse
of the Great Seal of the United States as ‘Novus ordo seclorum’
underneath the Cult symbol used since w ay back of the pyramid and
all seeing-ey e ( Fig 3 ). The pyramid is the hierarchy of human control
headed by the illuminated ey e that symbolises the force behind the
Cult which I will expose in later chapters. The term ‘ Annuit Coeptis’
translates as ‘He fav ours our undertaking’. W e are told the ‘He’ is
the Christian god, but ‘He’ is not as I will be explaining.
Figure 3: The all-seeing eye of the Cult ‘god’ on the Freemason-designed Great Seal of the
United States and also on the dollar bill.
Having you on
T w o major Cult techniques of perceptual manipulation that relate to
all this are what I hav e called since the 1990s Problem-Reaction-
Solution (PRS) and the T otalitarian Tiptoe (TT). They can be
uncov ered by the inquiring mind with a simple question: Who
beneﬁts? The answ er usually identiﬁes the perpetrators of a giv en
action or happening through the concept of ‘he who most beneﬁts
from a crime is the one most likely to hav e commi ed it’. The Latin
‘Cue bono?’ – Who beneﬁts? – is widely a ributed to the Roman
orator and statesman Marcus T ullius Cicero. No w onder it goes back
so far when the concept has been relev ant to human behaviour sincehistory w as recorded. Problem-Reaction-Solution is the technique
used to manipulate us ev ery day by cov ertly creating a problem (or
the illusion of one) and oﬀering the solution to the problem (or the
illusion of one). In the ﬁrst phase y ou create the problem and blame
someone or something else for why it has happened. This may relate
to a ﬁnancial collapse, terrorist a ack, w ar , global w arming or
pandemic, anything in fact that will allow y ou to impose the
‘solution’ to change society in the w ay y ou desire at that time. The
‘problem’ doesn’ t hav e to be real. PRS is manipulation of perception
and all y ou need is the population to believ e the problem is real.
Human-caused global w arming and the ‘Covid pandemic’ only hav e
to be perceived  to be real for the population to accept the ‘solutions’ of
authority . I refer to this technique as NO-Problem-Reaction-Solution.
Billions did not meekly accept house arrest from early 2020 because
there w as a real deadly ‘Covid pandemic’ but because they
perceiv ed – believ ed – that to be the case. The antidote to Problem-
Reaction-Solution is to ask who beneﬁts from the proposed solution.
Inv ariably it will be any one who w ants to justify more control
through deletion of freedom and centralisation of pow er and
decision-making.
The tw o w orld w ars w ere Problem-Reaction-Solutions that
transformed and realigned global society . Both w ere manipulated
into being by the Cult as I hav e detailed in books since the mid-
1990s. They dramatically centralised global pow er , especially W orld
W ar T w o, which led to the United Nations and other global bodies
thanks to the ov ert and cov ert manipulations of the Rockefeller
family and other Cult bloodlines like the Rothschilds. The UN is a
stalking horse for full-blown w orld gov ernment that I will come to
shortly . The land on which the UN building stands in New Y ork w as
donated by the Rockefellers and the same Cult family w as behind
Big Pharma scalpel and drug ‘medicine’ and the creation of the
W orld Health Organization as part of the UN. They hav e been
stalw arts of the eugenics mov ement and funded Hitler ’ s race-purity
expert’ Ernst Rudin. The human-caused global w arming hoax has
been orchestrated by the Club of Rome through the UN which ismanufacturing both the ‘problem’ through its Intergov ernmental
P anel on Climate Change and imposing the ‘solution’ through its
Agenda 21 and Agenda 2030 which demand the total centralisation
of global pow er to ‘sav e the w orld’ from a climate hoax the United
Nations is itself perpetrating. What a small w orld the Cult can be
seen to be particularly among the inner circles. The bedfellow of
Problem-Reaction-Solution is the T otalitarian Tiptoe which became
the T otalitarian Sprint in 2020. The technique is fashioned to hide the
carefully-coordinated behind the cov er of apparently random ev ents.
Y ou start the sequence at ‘ A ’ and y ou know y ou are heading for ‘Z’.
Y ou don’ t w ant people to know that and each step on the journey is
presented as a random happening while all the steps strung together
lead in the same direction. The speed may hav e quickened
dramatically in recent times, but y ou can still see the incremental
approach of the Tiptoe in the case of ‘Covid’ as each new imposition
takes us deeper into fascism. T ell people they hav e to do this or that
to get back to ‘normal’, then this and this and this. W ith each new
demand adding to the ones that w ent before the population’ s
freedom is deleted until it disappears. The spider wraps its w eb
around the ﬂies more comprehensiv ely with each new diktat. I’ll
highlight this in more detail when I get to the ‘Covid’ hoax and how
it has been pulled oﬀ. Another prime example of the T otalitarian
Tiptoe is how the Cult-created European Union w ent from a ‘free-
trade zone’ to a centralised bureaucratic dictatorship through the
Tiptoe of incremental centralisation of pow er until nations became
mere administrativ e units for Cult-owned dark suits in Brussels.
The antidote to ignorance is knowledge which the Cult seeks
v ehemently to deny us, but despite the systematic censorship to that
end the Renegade Mind can ov ercome this by v ociferously seeking
out the facts no ma er the impediments put in the w ay . There is also
a method of thinking and perceiving – knowing  – that doesn’ t ev en
need names, dates, place-type facts to identify the pa erns that
rev eal the story . I’ll get to that in the ﬁnal chapter . All y ou need to
know about the manipulation of human society and to what end is
still out there – at the  time of writing  – in the form of books, videosand w ebsites for those that really w ant to breach the w alls of
programmed perception. T o access this knowledge requires the
abandonment of the mainstream media as a source of information in
the aw areness that this is owned and controlled by the Cult and
therefore promotes mass perceptions that suit the Cult. Mainstream
media lies all day , ev ery day . That is its function and v ery reason for
being. Where it does tell the truth, here and there, is only because the
truth and the Cult agenda v ery occasionally coincide. If y ou look for
fact and insight to the BBC, CNN and virtually all the rest of them
y ou are asking to be conned and perceptually programmed.
Know the outcome and you’ll see the journey
Ev ents seem random when y ou hav e no idea where the w orld is
being taken. Once y ou do the random becomes the carefully
planned. Know the outcome and y ou’ll see the journey is a phrase I
hav e been using for a long time to giv e context to daily happenings
that appear unconnected. Does a problem, or illusion of a problem,
trigger a proposed ‘solution’ that further driv es society in the
direction of the outcome? Inv ariably the answ er will be y es and the
random – abracadabra  – becomes the clearly coordinated. So what is
this outcome that unlocks the door to a massiv ely expanded
understanding of daily ev ents? I will summarise its major aspects –
the ﬁne detail is in my other books – and those new to this
information will see that the w orld they thought they w ere living in
is a v ery diﬀerent place. The foundation of the Cult agenda is the
incessant centralisation of pow er and all such centralisation is
ultimately in pursuit of Cult control on a global lev el. I hav e
described for a long time the planned w orld structure of top-down
dictatorship as the Hunger Games Society . The term obviously
comes from the movie series which portray ed a w orld in which a
few living in military-protected hi-tech luxury w ere the ov erlords of
a population condemned to abject pov erty in isolated ‘sectors’ that
w ere not allow ed to interact. ‘Covid’ lockdowns and trav el bans
any one? The ‘Hunger Games’ pyramid of structural control has the
inner circle of the Cult at the top with pre y much the entirepopulation at the bo om under their control through dependency
for surviv al on the Cult. The whole structure is planned to be
protected and enforced by a military-police state ( Fig 4 ).
Here y ou hav e the reason for the global lockdowns of the fake
pandemic to coldly destroy independent incomes and liv elihoods
and make ev ery one dependent on the ‘state’ (the Cult that controls
the ‘states’). I hav e w arned in my books for many y ears about the
plan to introduce a ‘guaranteed income’ – a barely surviv able
pi ance – designed to impose dependency when employment w as
destroy ed by AI technology and now ev en more comprehensiv ely at
great speed by the ‘Covid’ scam. Once the pandemic w as play ed and
lockdown consequences began to delete independent income the
authorities began to talk right on cue about the need for a
guaranteed income and a ‘Great Reset’. Guaranteed income will be
presented as benev olent gov ernments seeking to help a desperate
people – desperate as a direct result of actions of the same
gov ernments. The truth is that such payments are a trap. Y ou will
only get them if y ou do exactly what the authorities demand
including mass v accination (genetic manipulation). W e hav e seen
this theme already in Australia where those dependent on
gov ernment beneﬁts hav e them reduced if parents don’ t agree to
hav e their children v accinated according to an insane health-
destroying gov ernment-dictated schedule. Calculated economic
collapse applies to gov ernments as w ell as people. The Cult w ants
rid of countries through the creation of a w orld state with countries
broken up into regions ruled by a w orld gov ernment and super
states like the European Union. Countries must be bankrupted, too,
to this end and it’ s being achiev ed by the trillions in ‘rescue
packages’ and furlough payments, trillions in lost taxation, and
money-no-object spending on ‘Covid’ including constant all-
medium adv ertising (programming) which has made the media
dependent on gov ernment for much of its income. The day of
reckoning is coming – as planned – for gov ernment spending and
giv en that it has been made possible by printing money and not by
production/taxation there is inﬂation on the w ay that has thepotential to wipe out monetary v alue. In that case there will be no
need for the Cult to steal y our money . It just w on’ t be w orth
anything (see the German W eimar Republic before the Nazis took
ov er). Many hav e been okay with lockdowns while ge ing a
percentage of their income from so-called furlough payments
without having to w ork. Those payments are dependent, how ev er ,
on people having at least a theoretical job with a business considered
non-essential and ordered to close. As these business go under
because they are closed by lockdown a er lockdown the furlough
stops and it will for ev ery one ev entually . Then what? The ‘then
what?’ is precisely the idea.
Figure 4: The Hunger Games Society structure I have long warned was planned and now the
‘Covid’ hoax has made it possible. This is the real reason for lockdowns.
Hired hands
Betw een the Hunger Games Cult elite and the dependent population
is planned to be a vicious military-police state (a fusion of the tw o
into one force). This has been in the making for a long time with
police looking ev er more like the military and carrying w eapons to
match. The pandemic scam has seen this process accelerate so fast aslockdown house arrest is brutally enforced by carefully recruited
fascist minds and gormless system-serv ers. The police and military
are planned to merge into a centrally-directed w orld army in a
global structure headed by a w orld gov ernment which w ouldn’ t be
elected ev en by the election ﬁxes now in place. The w orld army is
not planned ev en to be human and instead w ars w ould be fought,
primarily against the population, using robot technology controlled
by artiﬁcial intelligence. I hav e been w arning about this for decades
and now militaries around the w orld are being transformed by this
v ery AI technology . The global regime that I describe is a particular
form of fascism known as a technocracy in which decisions are not
made by clueless and co-opted politicians but by unelected
technocrats – scientists, engineers, technologists and bureaucrats.
Cult-owned-and-controlled Silicon V alley giants are examples of
technocracy and they already hav e far more pow er to direct w orld
ev ents than gov ernments. They are with their censorship selecting
gov ernments. I know that some are calling the ‘Great Reset’ a
Marxist communist takeov er , but fascism and Marxism are diﬀerent
labels for the same tyranny . T ell those who liv ed in fascist Germany
and Stalinist Russia that there w as a diﬀerence in the w ay their
freedom w as deleted and their liv es controlled. I could call it a fascist
technocracy or a Marxist technocracy and they w ould be equally
accurate. The Hunger Games society with its w orld gov ernment
structure w ould ov ersee a w orld army , w orld central bank and single
w orld cashless currency imposing its will on a microchipped
population ( Fig 5 ). Scan its diﬀerent elements and see how the
illusory pandemic is forcing society in this v ery direction at great
speed. Leaders of 23 countries and the W orld Health Organization
(WHO) backed the idea in March, 2021, of a global treaty for
‘international cooperation’ in ‘health emergencies’ and nations
should ‘come together as a global community for peaceful
cooperation that extends bey ond this crisis’. Cut the Orw ellian
bullshit and this means another step tow ards global gov ernment.
The plan includes a cashless digital money system that I ﬁrst w arned
about in 1993. Right at the start of ‘Covid’ the deeply corrupt T edrosAdhanom Ghebrey esus, the crooked and merely gofer ‘head’ of the
W orld Health Organization, said it w as possible to catch the ‘virus’
by touching cash and it w as be er to use cashless means. The claim
w as ridiculous nonsense and like the whole ‘Covid’ mind-trick it
w as nothing to do with ‘health’ and ev erything to do with pushing
ev ery aspect of the Cult agenda. As a result of the T edros lie the use
of cash has plummeted. The Cult script inv olv es a single w orld
digital currency that w ould ev entually be technologically embedded
in the body . China is a massiv e global centre for the Cult and if y ou
w atch what is happening there y ou will know what is planned for
ev erywhere. The Chinese gov ernment is dev eloping a digital
currency which w ould allow ﬁnes to be deducted immediately via
AI for any one caught on camera breaking its fantastic list of laws
and the money is going to be programmable with an expiry date to
ensure that no one can accrue w ealth except the Cult and its
operativ es.
Figure 5: The structure of global control the Cult has been working towards for so long and
this has been enormously advanced by the ‘Covid’ illusion.
Serfdom is so smart
The Cult plan is far wider , extreme, and more comprehensiv e than
ev en most conspiracy researchers appreciate and I will come to the
true depths of deceit and control in the chapters ‘Who controls theCult?’ and ‘Escaping W etiko’. Ev en the w orld that w e know is crazy
enough. W e are being deluged with ev er more sophisticated and
controlling technology under the heading of ‘smart’. W e hav e smart
televisions, smart meters, smart cards, smart cars, smart driving,
smart roads, smart pills, smart patches, smart w atches, smart skin,
smart borders, smart pav ements, smart streets, smart cities, smart
communities, smart environments, smart growth, smart planet ...
smart everything  around us. Smart technologies and methods of
operation are designed to interlock to create a global Smart Grid
connecting the entirety of human society including human minds to
create a centrally-dictated ‘hiv e’ mind. ‘Smart cities’ is code for
densely-occupied megacities of total surv eillance and control
through AI. Ev er more destructiv e frequency communication
systems like 5G hav e been rolled out without any oﬃcial testing for
health and psychological eﬀects (colossal). 5G/6G/7G systems are
needed to run the Smart Grid and each one becomes more
destructiv e of body and mind. Deleting independent income is
crucial to forcing people into these AI-policed prisons by ending
priv ate property ownership (except for the Cult elite). The Cult’ s
Great Reset now openly foresees a global society in which no one
will own any possessions and ev erything will be rented while the
Cult w ould own literally ev erything under the guise of gov ernment
and corporations. The aim has been to use the lockdowns to destroy
sources of income on a mass scale and when the people are destitute
and in unrepay able amounts of debt (problem) Cult assets come
forw ard with the pledge to write-oﬀ debt in return for handing ov er
all property and possessions (solution). Ev erything – literally
ev erything including people – w ould be connected to the Internet
via AI. I w as w arning y ears ago about the coming Internet of Things
(IoT) in which all devices and technology from y our car to y our
fridge w ould be plugged into the Internet and controlled by AI.
Now w e are already there with much more to come. The next stage
is the Internet of Ev erything (IoE) which is planned to include the
connection of AI to the human brain and body to replace the human
mind with a centrally-controlled AI mind. Instead of perceptionsbeing manipulated through control of information and censorship
those perceptions w ould come direct from the Cult through AI.
What do y ou think? Y ou think whatev er AI decides that y ou think.
In human terms there w ould be no individual ‘think’ any longer . T oo
incredible? The ravings of a lunatic? Not at all. Cult-owned crazies
in Silicon V alley hav e been telling us the plan for y ears without
explaining the real motiv ation and calculated implications. These
include Google executiv e and ‘futurist’ Ray Kurzw eil who highlights
the y ear 2030 for when this w ould be underw ay . He said:
Our thinking ... will be a hybrid of biological and non-biological thinking ... humans will be
able to extend their limitations and ‘think in the cloud’ ... We’re going to put gateways to the
cloud in our brains ... We’re going to gradually merge and enhance ourselves ... In my view,
that’s the nature of being human – we transcend our limitations.
As the technology becomes vastly superior to what we are then the small proportion that is
still human gets smaller and smaller and smaller until it’s just utterly negligible.
The sales-pitch of Kurzw eil and Cult-owned Silicon V alley is that
this w ould make us ‘super -human’ when the real aim is to make us
post-human and no longer ‘human’ in the sense that w e hav e come
to know . The entire global population w ould be connected to AI and
become the centrally-controlled ‘hiv e-mind’ of externally-deliv ered
perceptions. The Smart Grid being installed to impose the Cult’ s will
on the w orld is being constructed to allow particular locations – ev en
one location – to control the whole global system. From these prime
control centres, which absolutely include China and Israel, anything
connected to the Internet w ould be switched on or oﬀ and
manipulated at will. Energy systems could be cut, communication
via the Internet taken down, computer -controlled driv erless
autonomous v ehicles driv en oﬀ the road, medical devices switched
oﬀ, the potential is limitless giv en how much AI and Internet
connections now run human society . W e hav e seen nothing y et if w e
allow this to continue. Autonomous v ehicle makers are w orking
with law enforcement to produce cars designed to automatically pull
ov er if they detect a police or emergency v ehicle ﬂashing from up to
100 feet aw ay . At a police stop the car w ould be unlocked and thewindow rolled down automatically . V ehicles w ould only take y ou
where the computer (the state) allow ed. The end of petrol v ehicles
and speed limiters on all new cars in the UK and EU from 2022 are
steps leading to electric computerised transport ov er which
ultimately y ou hav e no control. The picture is far bigger ev en than
the Cult global netw ork or w eb and that will become clear when I
get to the nature of the ‘spider ’. There is a connection betw een all
these happenings and the instigation of DNA-manipulating
‘v accines’ (which aren’ t ‘v accines’) justiﬁed by the ‘Covid’ hoax. That
connection is the unfolding plan to transform the human body from
a biological to a synthetic biological state and this is why synthetic
biology is such a fast-emerging discipline of mainstream science.
‘Covid v accines’ are infusing self-replicating synthetic genetic
material into the cells to cumulativ ely take us on the T otalitarian
Tiptoe from Human 1.0 to the synthetic biological Human 2.0 which
will be physically and perceptually a ached to the Smart Grid to one
hundred percent control ev ery thought, perception and deed.
Humanity needs to w ake up and fast .
This is the barest explanation of where the ‘outcome’ is planned to
go but it’ s enough to see the journey happening all around us. Those
new to this information will already see ‘Covid’ in a whole new
context. I will add much more detail as w e go along, but for the
minutiae evidence see my mega-w orks, The Answer, The Trigger  and
Everything You Need to Know But Have Never Been Told .
Now – how does a Renegade Mind see the ‘w orld’?ACHAPTER TWO
Renegade Perception
It is one thing to be clever and another to be wise
George R.R. Martin
simple deﬁnition of the diﬀerence betw een a programmed
mind and a Renegade Mind w ould be that one sees only dots
while the other connects them to see the picture. Reading reality
with accuracy requires the observ er to (a) know the planned
outcome and (b) realise that ev erything, but everything , is connected.
The entirety of inﬁnite reality is connected – that’ s its v ery nature –
and with human society an expression of inﬁnite reality the same
must apply . Simple cause and eﬀect is a connection. The eﬀect is
triggered by the cause and the eﬀect then becomes the cause of
another eﬀect. Nothing happens in isolation because it can’t . Life in
whatev er reality is simple choice and consequence. W e make choices
and these lead to consequences. If w e don’ t like the consequences w e
can make diﬀerent choices and get diﬀerent consequences which
lead to other choices and consequences. The choice and the
consequence are not only connected they are indivisible. Y ou can’ t
hav e one without the other as an old song goes. A few cannot
control the w orld unless those being controlled allow that to happen
– cause and eﬀect, choice and consequence. Control – who has it and
who doesn’ t – is a tw o-w ay process, a symbiotic relationship,
inv olving the controller and controlled. ‘They took my freedom
aw ay!!’ W ell, y es, but y ou also gav e it to them. Humanity issubjected to mass control because humanity has acquiesced to that
control. This is all cause and eﬀect and literally a case of giv e and
take. In the same w ay w orld ev ents of ev ery kind are connected and
the Cult w orks incessantly to sell the illusion of the random and
coincidental to maintain the essential (to them) perception of dots
that hide the picture. Renegade Minds know this and constantly
scan the w orld for pa erns of connection. This is absolutely piv otal
in understanding the happenings in the w orld and without that
perspectiv e clarity is impossible. First y ou know the planned
outcome and then y ou identify the steps on the journey – the day-by-
day apparently random which, when connected in relation to the
outcome, no longer appear as individual ev ents, but as the
prov erbial chain  of ev ents leading in the same direction. I’ll giv e y ou
some examples:
Political puppet show
W e are told to believ e that politics is ‘adv ersarial’ in that diﬀerent
parties with diﬀerent beliefs engage in an endless tussle for pow er .
There may hav e been some truth in that up to a point – and only a
point – but today divisions betw een ‘diﬀerent’ parties are rhetorical
not ideological. Ev en the rhetorical is fusing into one-speak as the
parties eject any remaining free thinkers while others succumb to the
ev er -gathering intimidation of any one with the ‘wrong’ opinion. The
Cult is not a new phenomenon and can be traced back thousands of
y ears as my books hav e documented. Its intergenerational initiates
hav e been manipulating ev ents with increasing eﬀect the more that
global pow er has been centralised. In ancient times the Cult secured
control through the system of monarchy in which ‘special’
bloodlines (of which more later) demanded the right to rule as kings
and queens simply by birthright and by v anquishing others who
claimed the same birthright. There came a time, how ev er , when
people had matured enough to see the unfairness of such tyranny
and demanded a say in who gov erned them. Note the w ord –
governed  them. Not serv ed them – governed  them, hence gov ernment
deﬁned as ‘the political direction and control exercised ov er theactions of the members, citizens, or inhabitants of communities,
societies, and states; direction of the aﬀairs of a state, community ,
etc.’ Gov ernments exercise control ov er rather than serv e just like the
monarchies before them. Bizarrely there are still countries like the
United Kingdom which are ruled by a monarch and  a gov ernment
that oﬃcially answ ers to the monarch. The UK head of state and that
of Commonw ealth countries such as Canada, Australia and New
Zealand is ‘selected’ by who in a single family  had unprotected sex
with whom and in what order . Pinch me it can’ t be true. Ouch! Shit,
it is. The demise of monarchies in most countries oﬀered a potential
v acuum in which some form of free and fair society could arise and
the Cult had that base cov ered. Monarchies had serv ed its interests
but they couldn’ t continue in the face of such widespread opposition
and, anyw ay , replacing a ‘roy al’ dictatorship that people could see
with a dictatorship ‘of the people’ hiding behind the concept of
‘democracy’ presented far greater manipulativ e possibilities and
w ays of hiding coordinated tyranny behind the illusion of ‘freedom’.
Democracy is quite wrongly deﬁned as gov ernment selected by
the population. This is not the case at all. It is gov ernment selected
by some  of the population (and then only in theory). This ‘some’
doesn’ t ev en hav e to be the majority as w e hav e seen so o en in ﬁrst-
past-the-post elections in which the so-called majority party wins
few er v otes than the ‘losing’ parties combined. Democracy can giv e
total pow er to a party in gov ernment from a minority of the v otes
cast. It’ s a sleight of hand to sell tyranny as freedom. Sev enty-four
million T rump-supporting Americans didn’ t v ote for the
‘Democratic’ P arty of Joe Biden in the distinctly dodgy election in
2020 and y et far from acknowledging the wishes and feelings of that
great percentage of American society the Cult-owned Biden
gov ernment set out from day one to destroy them and their right to a
v oice and opinion. Empty shell Biden and his Cult handlers said
they w ere doing this to ‘protect democracy’. Such is the lev el of
lunacy and sickness to which politics has descended. Connect the
dots and relate them to the desired outcome – a w orld gov ernment
run by self-appointed technocrats and no longer ev en electedpoliticians. While operating through its political agents in
gov ernment the Cult is at the same time encouraging public distain
for politicians by pu ing idiots and incompetents in theoretical
pow er on the road to deleting them. The idea is to instil a public
reaction that says of the technocrats: ‘W ell, they couldn’ t do any
w orse than the pathetic politicians.’ It’ s all about controlling
perception and Renegade Minds can see through that while
programmed minds cannot when they are ignorant of both the
planned outcome and the manipulation techniques employ ed to
secure that end. This knowledge can be learned, how ev er , and fast if
people choose to get informed.
P olitics may at ﬁrst sight appear v ery diﬃcult to control from a
central point. I mean look at the ‘diﬀerent’ parties and how w ould
y ou be able to ov ersee them all and their constituent parts? In truth,
it’ s v ery straightforw ard because of their structure. W e are back to
the pyramid of imposition and acquiescence. Organisations are
structured in the same w ay as the system as a whole. P olitical parties
are not open forums of free expression. They are hierarchies. I w as a
national spokesman for the British Green P arty which claimed to be
a diﬀerent kind of politics in which inﬂuence and pow er w as
dev olv ed; but I can tell y ou from direct experience – and it’ s far
w orse now – that Green parties are run as hierarchies like all the
others how ev er much they may try to hide that fact or kid
themselv es that it’ s not true. A v ery few at the top of all political
parties are directing policy and personnel. They decide if y ou are
elev ated in the party or serv e as a gov ernment minister and to do
that y ou hav e to be a y es man or w oman. Look at all the mav erick
political thinkers who nev er ascended the greasy pole. If y ou w ant to
progress within the party or reach ‘high-oﬃce’ y ou need to fall into
line and conform. Exceptions to this are rare indeed. Should y ou
w ant to run for parliament or Congress y ou hav e to persuade the
local or state lev el of the party to select y ou and for that y ou need to
play the game as dictated by the hierarchy . If y ou secure election and
wish to progress within the greater structure y ou need to go on
conforming to what is acceptable to those running the hierarchyfrom the peak of the pyramid. P olitical parties are perceptual gulags
and the v ery fact that there are party ‘Whips’ appointed to ‘whip’
politicians into v oting the w ay the hierarchy demands exposes the
ridiculous idea that politicians are elected to serv e the people they
are supposed to represent. Cult operativ es and manipulation has
long seized control of major parties that hav e any chance of forming
a gov ernment and at least most of those that hav en’ t. A new party
forms and the Cult goes to w ork to inﬁltrate and direct. This has
reached such a lev el today that y ou see video compilations of
‘leaders’ of all parties whether Democrats, Republicans,
Conserv ativ e, Labour and Green parroting the same Cult mantra of
‘Build Back Be er ’ and the ‘Great Reset’ which are straight oﬀ the
Cult song-sheet to describe the transformation of global society in
response to the Cult-instigated hoaxes of the ‘Covid pandemic’ and
human-caused ‘climate change’. T o see Caroline Lucas, the Green
P arty MP that I knew when I w as in the party in the 1980s, speaking
in support of plans proposed by Cult operativ e Klaus Schw ab
representing the billionaire global elite is a real head-shaker .
Many parties – one master
The party system is another mind-trick and w as instigated to change
the nature of the dictatorship by sw apping ‘roy alty’ for dark suits
that people believ ed – though now ev er less so – represented their
interests. Understanding this trick is to realise that a single force (the
Cult) controls all parties either directly in terms of the major ones or
through manipulation of perception and ideology with others. Y ou
don’ t need to manipulate Green parties to demand y our
transformation of society in the name of ‘climate change’ when they
are obsessed with the lie that this is essential to ‘sav e the planet’. Y ou
just giv e them a platform and aw ay they go serving y our interests
while believing they are being environmentally virtuous. America’ s
political structure is a perfect blueprint for how the tw o or multi-
party system is really a one-party state. The Republican P arty is
controlled from one step back in the shadows by a group made up of
billionaires and their gofers known as neoconserv ativ es or Neocons.I hav e exposed them in ﬁne detail in my books and they w ere the
driving force behind the policies of the imbecilic presidency of Boy
George Bush which included 9/11 (see The Trigger  for a
comprehensiv e demolition of the oﬃcial story), the subsequent ‘w ar
on terror ’ (w ar of  terror) and the inv asions of Afghanistan and Iraq.
The la er w as a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution based on claims by
Cult operativ es, including Bush and British Prime Minister T ony
Blair , about Saddam Hussein’ s ‘w eapons of mass destruction’ which
did not exist as w ar criminals Bush and Blair w ell knew .
Figure 6: Different front people, different parties – same control system.
The Democratic P arty has its own ‘Neocon’ group controlling
from the background which I call the ‘Democons’ and here’ s the
penny-drop – the Neocons and Democons answ er to the same
masters one step further back into the shadows ( Fig 6 ). At that lev el
of the Cult the Republican and Democrat parties are controlled by
the same people and no ma er which is in pow er the Cult is in
pow er . This is how it w orks in almost ev ery country and certainly in
Britain with Conserv ativ e, Labour , Liberal Democrat and Green
parties now all on the same page whatev er the rhetoric may be in
their feeble a empts to appear diﬀerent. Neocons operated at the
time of Bush through a think tank called The Project for the New
American Century which in September , 2000, published a document
entitled Rebuilding America’s Defenses: Strategies, Forces, and ResourcesFor a New Century  demanding that America ﬁght ‘multiple,
simultaneous major theatre w ars’ as a ‘core mission’ to force regime-
change in countries including Iraq, Liby a and Syria. Neocons
arranged for Bush (‘Republican’) and Blair (‘Labour P arty’) to front-
up the inv asion of Iraq and when they departed the Democons
orchestrated the targeting of Liby a and Syria through Barack Obama
(‘Democrat’) and British Prime Minister David Cameron
(‘Conserv ativ e P arty’). W e hav e ‘diﬀerent’ parties and ‘diﬀerent’
people, but the same unfolding script. The more the Cult has seized
the reigns of parties and personnel the more their policies hav e
transparently pursued the same agenda to the point where the
fascist ‘Covid’ impositions of the Conserv ativ e junta of Jackboot
Johnson in Britain w ere opposed by the Labour P arty because they
w ere not fascist enough. The Labour P arty is likened to the US
Democrats while the Conserv ativ e P arty is akin to a British v ersion
of the Republicans and on both sides of the Atlantic they all speak
the same language and support the direction demanded by the Cult
although some more enthusiastically than others. It’ s a similar story
in country a er country because it’ s all centrally controlled. Oh, but
what about T rump? I’ll come to him shortly . P olitical ‘choice’ in the
‘party’ system goes like this: Y ou v ote for P arty A and they get into
gov ernment. Y ou don’ t like what they do so next time y ou v ote for
P arty B and they get into gov ernment. Y ou don’ t like what they do
when it’ s pre y much the same as P arty A and why w ouldn’ t that be
with both controlled by the same force? Giv en that only tw o,
sometimes three, parties hav e any chance of forming a gov ernment
to get rid of P arty B that y ou don’ t like y ou hav e to v ote again for
P arty A which … y ou don’ t like. This, ladies and gentlemen, is what
they call ‘democracy’ which w e are told – wrongly – is a term
interchangeable with ‘freedom’.
The cult of cults
At this point I need to introduce a major expression of the Global
Cult known as Sabbatian-Frankism. Sabbatian is also spelt as
Sabbatean. I will summarise here. I hav e published major exposésand detailed background in other w orks. Sabbatian-Frankism
combines the names of tw o frauds posing as ‘Jewish’ men, Sabbatai
Zevi (1626-1676), a rabbi, black magician and occultist who
proclaimed he w as the Jewish messiah; and Jacob Frank (1726-1791),
the P olish ‘Jew’, black magician and occultist who said he w as the
reincarnation of ‘messiah’ Zevi and biblical patriarch Jacob. They
w orked across tw o centuries to establish the Sabbatian-Frankist cult
that plays a major , indeed central, role in the manipulation of human
society by the Global Cult which has its origins much further back in
history than Sabbatai Zevi. I should emphasise tw o points here in
response to the shrill v oices that will scream ‘anti-Semitism’: (1)
Sabbatian-Frankists are NOT Jewish and only pose as such to hide
their cult behind a Jewish façade; and (2) my information about this
cult has come from Jewish sources who hav e long realised that their
society and community has been inﬁltrated and taken ov er by
interloper Sabbatian-Frankists. Inﬁltration has been the foundation
technique of Sabbatian-Frankism from its oﬃcial origin in the 17th
century . Zevi’ s Sabbatian sect a racted a massiv e following
described as the biggest messianic mov ement in Jewish history ,
spreading as far as Africa and Asia, and he promised a return for the
Jews to the ‘Promised Land’ of Israel. Sabbatianism w as not Judaism
but an inv ersion of ev erything that mainstream Judaism stood for . So
much so that this sinister cult w ould hav e a feast day when Judaism
had a fast day and whatev er w as forbidden in Judaism the
Sabbatians w ere encouraged and ev en commanded to do. This
included incest and what w ould be today called Satanism. Members
w ere forbidden to marry outside the sect and there w as a system of
keeping their children ignorant of what they w ere part of until they
w ere old enough to be trusted not to unknowingly rev eal anything
to outsiders. The same system is employ ed to this day by the Global
Cult in general which Sabbatian-Frankism has enormously
inﬂuenced and now largely controls.
Zevi and his Sabbatians suﬀered a setback with the interv ention
by the Sultan of the Islamic O oman Empire in the Middle East and
what is now the Republic of T urkey where Zevi w as located. TheSultan gav e him the choice of proving his ‘divinity’, conv erting to
Islam or facing torture and death. Funnily enough Zevi chose to
conv ert or at least appear to. Some of his supporters w ere
disillusioned and dri ed aw ay , but many did not with 300 families
also conv erting – only in theory – to Islam. They continued behind
this Islamic smokescreen to follow the goals, rules and rituals of
Sabbatianism and became known as ‘crypto-Jews’ or the ‘Dönmeh’
which means ‘to turn’. This is rather ironic because they didn’ t ‘turn’
and instead hid behind a fake Islamic persona. The process of
appearing to be one thing while being v ery much another w ould
become the calling card of Sabbatianism especially a er Zevi’ s death
and the arriv al of the Satanist Jacob Frank in the 18th century when
the cult became Sabbatian-Frankism and plumbed still new depths
of depravity and inﬁltration which included – still includes – human
sacriﬁce and sex with children. Wherev er Sabbatians go paedophilia
and Satanism follow and is it really a surprise that Hollyw ood is so
infested with child abuse and Satanism when it w as established by
Sabbatian-Frankists and is still controlled by them? Hollyw ood has
been one of the prime v ehicles for global perceptual programming
and manipulation. How many believ e the v ersion of ‘history’
portray ed in movies when it is a trav esty and inv ersion (again) of the
truth? Rabbi Marvin Antelman describes Frankism in his book, To
Eliminate the Opiate , as ‘a mov ement of complete evil’ while Jewish
professor Gershom Scholem said of Frank in The Messianic Idea in
Judaism : ‘In all his actions [he w as] a truly corrupt and degenerate
individual ... one of the most frightening phenomena in the whole of
Jewish history .’ Frank w as excommunicated by traditional rabbis, as
w as Zevi, but Frank w as undeterred and enjoy ed vital support from
the House of Rothschild, the infamous banking dynasty whose
inner -core are Sabbatian-Frankists and not Jews. Inﬁltration of the
Roman Church and V atican w as instigated by Frank with many
Dönmeh ‘turning’ again to conv ert to Roman Catholicism with a
view to hĳacking the reins of pow er . This w as the ev er -repeating
modus operandi and continues to be so. P ose as an adv ocate of the
religion, culture or country that y ou w ant to control and thenmanipulate y our people into the positions of authority and inﬂuence
largely as advisers, administrators and Sv engalis for those that
appear to be in pow er . They did this with Judaism, Christianity
(Christian Zionism is part of this), Islam and other religions and
nations until Sabbatian-Frankism spanned the w orld as it does
today .
Sabbatian Saudis and the terror network
One expression of the Sabbatian-Frankist Dönmeh within Islam is
the ruling family of Saudi Arabia, the House of Saud, through which
came the vile distortion of Islam known as W ahhabism. This is the
violent creed follow ed by terrorist groups like Al-Qaeda and ISIS or
Islamic State. W ahhabism is the hand-chopping, head-chopping
‘religion’ of Saudi Arabia which is used to keep the people in a
constant state of fear so the interloper House of Saud can continue to
rule. Al-Qaeda and Islamic State w ere lavishly funded by the House
of Saud while being created and directed by the Sabbatian-Frankist
netw ork in the United States that operates through the P entagon,
CIA and the gov ernment in general of whichev er ‘party’. The front
man for the establishment of W ahhabism in the middle of the 18th
century w as a Sabbatian-Frankist ‘crypto-Jew’ posing as Islamic
called Muhammad ibn Abd al- W ahhab. His daughter w ould marry
the son of Muhammad bin Saud who established the ﬁrst Saudi state
before his death in 1765 with support from the British Empire. Bin
Saud’ s successors w ould establish modern Saudi Arabia in league
with the British and Americans in 1932 which allow ed them to seize
control of Islam’ s major shrines in Mecca and Medina. They hav e
dictated the direction of Sunni Islam ev er since while Iran is the
major centre of the Shiite v ersion and here w e hav e the source of at
least the public conﬂict betw een them. The Sabbatian netw ork has
used its W ahhabi extremists to carry out Problem-Reaction-Solution
terrorist a acks in the name of ‘ Al-Qaeda’ and ‘Islamic State’ to
justify a dev astating ‘w ar on terror ’, ev er -increasing surv eillance of
the population and to terrify people into compliance. Another
insight of the Renegade Mind is the streetwise understanding thatjust because a country , location or people are a acked doesn’ t mean
that those apparently representing that country , location or people
are not behind the a ackers. O en they are orchestrating  the a acks
because of the societal changes that can be then justiﬁed in the name
of ‘saving the population from terrorists’.
I show in great detail in The Trigger  how Sabbatian-Frankists w ere
the real perpetrators of 9/11 and not ‘19 Arab hĳackers’ who w ere
blamed for what happened. Observ e what w as justiﬁed in the name
of 9/11 alone in terms of Middle East inv asions, mass surv eillance
and control that fulﬁlled the demands of the Project for the New
American Century document published by the Sabbatian Neocons.
What appear to be enemies are on the deep inside play ers on the
same Sabbatian team. Israel and Arab ‘roy al’ dictatorships are all
ruled by Sabbatians and the recent peace agreements betw een Israel
and Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and others are
only making formal what has alw ays been the case behind the
scenes. P alestinians who hav e been subjected to grotesque tyranny
since Israel w as bombed and terrorised into existence in 1948 hav e
nev er stood a chance. Sabbatian-Frankists hav e controlled Israel (so
the constant theme of violence and w ar which Sabbatians lov e) and
they hav e controlled the Arab countries that P alestinians hav e
looked to for real support that nev er comes. ‘Roy al families’ of the
Arab w orld in Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, UAE, etc., are all Sabbatians
with allegiance to the aims of the cult and not what is best for their
Arabic populations. They hav e stolen the oil and ﬁnancial resources
from their people by false claims to be ‘roy al dynasties’ with a
genetic right to rule and by employing vicious militaries to impose
their will.
Satanic ‘illumination’
The Satanist Jacob Frank formed an alliance in 1773 with tw o other
Sabbatians, May er Amschel Rothschild (1744-1812), founder of the
Rothschild banking dynasty , and Jesuit-educated fraudulent Jew ,
Adam W eishaupt, and this led to the formation of the Bav arian
Illuminati, ﬁrstly under another name, in 1776. The Illuminati w ouldbe the manipulating force behind the French Rev olution (1789-1799)
and w as also inv olv ed in the American Rev olution (1775-1783)
before and a er the Illuminati’ s oﬃcial creation. W eishaupt w ould
later become (in public) a Protestant Christian in archetypal
Sabbatian style. I read that his name can be decoded as Adam- W eis-
haupt or ‘the ﬁrst man to lead those who know’. He w asn’ t a leader
in the sense that he w as a subordinate, but he did lead those below
him in a crusade of transforming human society that still continues
today . The theme w as conﬁrmed as early as 1785 when a horseman
courier called Lanz w as reported to be struck by lighting and
extensiv e Illuminati documents w ere found in his saddlebags. They
made the link to W eishaupt and detailed the plan for w orld takeov er .
Current ev ents with ‘Covid’ fascism hav e been in the making for a
v ery long time. Jacob Frank w as jailed for 13 y ears by the Catholic
Inquisition a er his arrest in 1760 and on his release he headed for
Frankfurt, Germany , home city and headquarters of the House of
Rothschild where the alliance w as struck with May er Amschel
Rothschild and W eishaupt. Rothschild arranged for Frank to be
giv en the title of Baron and he became a w ealthy nobleman with a
big following of Jews in Germany , the Austro-Hungarian Empire
and other European countries. Most of them w ould hav e believ ed he
w as on their side.
The name ‘Illuminati’ came from the Zohar which is a body of
w orks in the Jewish mystical ‘bible’ called the Kabbalah. ‘Zohar ’ is
the foundation of Sabbatian-Frankist belief and in Hebrew ‘Zohar ’
means ‘splendour ’, ‘radiance’, ‘illuminated’, and so w e hav e
‘Illuminati’. They claim to be the ‘Illuminated Ones’ from their
knowledge systematically hidden from the human population and
passed on through generations of carefully-chosen initiates in the
global secret society netw ork or Cult. Hidden knowledge includes
an aw areness of the Cult agenda for the w orld and the nature of our
collectiv e reality that I will explore later . Cult ‘illumination’ is
symbolised by the torch held by the Statue of Liberty which w as
gi ed to New Y ork by French Freemasons in P aris who knew exactly
what it represents. ‘Liberty’ symbolises the goddess w orshipped inBabylon as Queen Semiramis or Ishtar . The signiﬁcance of this will
become clear . Notice again the ubiquitous theme of inv ersion with
the Statue of ‘Liberty’ really symbolising mass control ( Fig 7 ). A
mirror -image statute stands on an island in the Riv er Seine in P aris
from where New Y ork Liberty originated ( Fig 8 ). A large replica of
the Liberty ﬂame stands on top of the P ont de l’Alma tunnel in P aris
where Princess Diana died in a Cult ritual described in The Biggest
Secret . Lucifer ‘the light bringer ’ is related to all this (and much more
as w e’ll see) and ‘Lucifer ’ is a central ﬁgure in Sabbatian-Frankism
and its associated Satanism. Sabbatians reject the Jewish T orah, or
P entateuch, the ‘ﬁv e books of Moses’ in the Old T estament known as
Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy which are
claimed by Judaism and Christianity to hav e been dictated by ‘God’
to Moses on Mount Sinai. Sabbatians say these do not apply to them
and they seek to replace them with the Zohar to absorb Judaism and
its follow ers into their inv ersion which is an expression of a much
greater global inv ersion. They w ant to delete all religions and force
humanity to w orship a one-w orld religion – Sabbatian Satanism that
also includes w orship of the Earth goddess. Satanic themes are being
more and more introduced into mainstream society and while
Christianity is currently the foremost target for destruction the
others are planned to follow .
Figure 7: The Cult goddess of Babylon disguised as the Statue of Liberty holding the flame of
Lucifer the ‘light bringer’.Figure 8: Liberty’s mirror image in Paris where the New York version originated.
Marx brothers
Rabbi Marvin Antelman connects the Illuminati to the Jacobins in To
Eliminate the Opiate  and Jacobins w ere the force behind the French
Rev olution. He links both to the Bund der Gerechten, or League of
the Just, which w as the netw ork that inﬂicted communism/Marxism
on the w orld. Antelman wrote:
The original inner circle of the Bund der Gerechten consisted of born Catholics, Protestants
and Jews [Sabbatian-Frankist infiltrators], and those representatives of respective subdivisions
formulated schemes for the ultimate destruction of their faiths. The heretical Catholics laid
plans which they felt would take a century or more for the ultimate destruction of the church;
the apostate Jews for the ultimate destruction of the Jewish religion.
Sabbatian-created communism connects into this anti-religion
agenda in that communism does not allow for the free practice of
religion. The Sabbatian ‘Bund’ became the International Communist
P arty and Communist League and in 1848 ‘Marxism’ w as born with
the Communist Manifesto of Sabbatian assets Karl Marx and
Friedrich Engels. It is absolutely no coincidence that Marxism, just a
diﬀerent name for fascist and other centrally-controlled tyrannies, is
being imposed w orldwide as a result of the ‘Covid’ hoax and nor
that Marxist/fascist China w as the place where the hoax originated.
The reason for this will become v ery clear in the chapter ‘Covid: The
calculated catastrophe’. The so-called ‘W oke’ mentality has hĳackedtraditional beliefs of the political le  and replaced them with far -
right make-believ e ‘social justice’ be er known as Marxism. W oke
will, how ev er , be sw allow ed by its own perceiv ed ‘rev olution’ which
is really the w ork of billionaires and billionaire corporations feigning
being ‘W oke’. Marxism is being touted by W okers as a replacement
for ‘capitalism’ when w e don’ t hav e ‘capitalism’. W e hav e cartelism
in which the market is stitched up by the v ery Cult billionaires and
corporations bankrolling W oke. Billionaires lov e Marxism which
keeps the people in servitude while they control from the top.
T erminally naïv e W okers think they are ‘changing the w orld’ when
it’ s the Cult that is doing the changing and when they hav e play ed
their vital part and become surplus to requirements they , too, will be
targeted. The Illuminati-Jacobins w ere behind the period known as
‘The T error ’ in the French Rev olution in 1793 and 1794 when Jacobin
Maximillian de Robespierre and his Orw ellian ‘Commi ee of Public
Safety’ killed 17,000 ‘enemies of the Rev olution’ who had once been
‘friends of the Rev olution’. Karl Marx (1818-1883), whose Sabbatian
creed of Marxism has cost the liv es of at least 100 million people, is a
hero once again to W okers who hav e been systematically kept
ignorant of real history by their ‘education’ programming. As a
result they now promote a Sabbatian ‘Marxist’ abomination destined
at some point to consume them. Rabbi Antelman, who spent decades
researching the Sabbatian plot, said of the League of the Just and
Karl Marx:
Contrary to popular opinion Karl Marx did not originate the Communist Manifesto. He was
paid for his services by the League of the Just, which was known in its country of origin,
Germany, as the Bund der Geaechteten.
Antelman said the text a ributed to Marx w as the w ork of other
people and Marx ‘w as only repeating what others already said’.
Marx w as ‘a hired hack – lackey of the w ealthy Illuminists’. Marx
famously said that religion w as the ‘opium of the people’ (part of the
Sabbatian plan to demonise religion) and Antelman called his books,
To Eliminate the Opiate . Marx w as born Jewish, but his family
conv erted to Christianity (Sabbatian modus operandi) and hea acked Jews, not least in his book, A World Without Jews . In doing
so he supported the Sabbatian plan to destroy traditional Jewishness
and Judaism which w e are clearly seeing today with the vindictiv e
targeting of orthodox Jews by the Sabbatian gov ernment of Israel
ov er ‘Covid’ laws. I don’ t follow any religion and it has done much
damage to the w orld ov er centuries and acted as a perceptual
straightjacket. Renegade Minds, how ev er , are alw ays asking why
something is being done. It doesn’ t ma er if they agree or disagree
with what is happening – why  is it happening is the question. The
‘why?’ can be answ ered with regard to religion in that religions
create interacting communities of believ ers when the Cult w ants to
dismantle all discourse, unity and interaction (see ‘Covid’
lockdowns) and the ultimate goal is to delete all religions for a one-
w orld religion of Cult Satanism w orshipping their ‘god’ of which
more later . W e see the same ‘why?’ with gun control in America. I
don’ t hav e guns and don’ t w ant them, but why is the Cult seeking to
disarm the population at the same time that law enforcement
agencies are armed to their molars and why has ev ery tyrant in
history sought to disarm people before launching the ﬁnal takeov er?
They include Hitler , Stalin, P ol P ot and Mao who follow ed
conﬁscation with violent seizing of pow er . Y ou know it’ s a Cult
agenda by the people who immediately race to the microphones to
exploit dead people in multiple shootings. Ultra-Zionist Cult lackey
Senator Chuck Schumer w as straight on the case a er ten people
w ere killed in Boulder , Colorado in March, 2121. Simple rule … if
Schumer w ants it the Cult w ants it and the same with his ultra-
Zionist mate the wild-ey ed Senator Adam Schiﬀ. At the same time
they w ere calling for the disarmament of Americans, many of whom
liv e a long w ay from a police response, Schumer , Schiﬀ and the rest
of these pampered clowns w ere si ing on Capitol Hill behind a
razor -wired security fence protected by thousands of armed troops
in addition to their own armed bodyguards. Mom and pop in an
isolated home? They’ re just potential mass shooters.
Zion MainframeSabbatian-Frankists and most importantly the Rothschilds w ere
behind the creation of ‘Zionism’, a political mov ement that
demanded a Jewish homeland in Israel as promised by Sabbatai
Zevi. The v ery symbol of Israel comes from the German meaning of
the name Rothschild. Dynasty founder May er Amschel Rothschild
changed the family name from Bauer to Rothschild, or ‘Red-Shield’
in German, in deference to the six-pointed ‘Star of David’ hexagram
display ed on the family’ s home in Frankfurt. The symbol later
appeared on the ﬂag of Israel a er the Rothschilds w ere centrally
inv olv ed in its creation. Hexagrams are not a uniquely Jewish
symbol and are widely used in occult (‘hidden’) netw orks o en as a
symbol for Saturn (see my other books for why). Neither are
Zionism and Jewishness interchangeable. Zionism is a political
mov ement and philosophy and not a ‘race’ or a people. Many Jews
oppose Zionism and many non-Jews, including US President Joe
Biden, call themselv es Zionists as does Israel-centric Donald T rump.
America’ s support for the Israel gov ernment is pre y much a gimme
with ultra-Zionist billionaires and corporations providing fantastic
and dominant funding for both political parties. Former
Congressw oman Cynthia McKinney has told how she w as
approached immediately she ran for oﬃce to ‘sign the pledge’ to
Israel and conﬁrm that she w ould alw ays v ote in that country’ s best
interests. All American politicians are approached in this w ay .
Any one who refuses will get no support or funding from the
enormous and all-pow erful Zionist lobby that includes organisations
like mega-lobby group AIP AC, the American Israel Public Aﬀairs
Commi ee. T rump’ s biggest funder w as ultra-Zionist casino and
media billionaire Sheldon Adelson while major funders of the
Democratic P arty include ultra-Zionist George Soros and ultra-
Zionist ﬁnancial and media mogul, Haim Saban. Some may reel back
at the suggestion that Soros is an Israel-ﬁrster (Sabbatian-controlled
Israel-ﬁrster), but Renegade Minds w atch the actions not the w ords
and ev erywhere Soros donates his billions the Sabbatian agenda
beneﬁts. In the spirit of Sabbatian inv ersion Soros pledged $1 billion
for a new univ ersity netw ork to promote ‘liberal v alues and tackle
intolerance’. He made the announcement during his annual speechat the Cult-owned W orld Economic Forum in Dav os, Switzerland, in
January , 2020, a er his ‘harsh criticism’ of ‘authoritarian rulers’
around the w orld. Y ou can only laugh at such brazen mendacity .
How he  doesn’ t laugh is the mystery . T ranslated from the Orw ellian
‘liberal v alues and tackle intolerance’ means teaching non-white
people to hate white people and for white people to loathe
themselv es for being born white. The reason for that will become
clear .
The ‘Anti-Semitism’ fraud
Zionists support the Jewish homeland in the land of P alestine which
has been the Sabbatian-Rothschild goal for so long, but not for the
beneﬁt of Jews. Sabbatians and their global Anti-Semitism Industry
hav e skew ed public and political opinion to equate opposing the
violent extremes of Zionism to be a blanket a ack and condemnation
of all Jewish people. Sabbatians and their global Anti-Semitism
Industry hav e skew ed public and political opinion to equate
opposing the violent extremes of Zionism to be a blanket a ack and
condemnation of all Jewish people. This is nothing more than a
Sabbatian protection racket to stop legitimate inv estigation and
exposure of their agendas and activities. The oﬃcial deﬁnition of
‘anti-Semitism’ has more recently been expanded to include criticism
of Zionism – a political movement  – and this w as done to further stop
exposure of Sabbatian inﬁltrators who created Zionism as w e know
it today in the 19th century . Renegade Minds will talk about these
subjects when they know the shit that will come their w ay . P eople
must decide if they w ant to know the truth or just cow er in the
corner in fear of what others will say . Sabbatians hav e been trying to
label me as ‘anti-Semitic’ since the 1990s as I hav e uncov ered more
and more about their background and agendas. Useless, gutless,
fraudulent ‘journalists’ then just repeat the smears without question
and on the day I w as writing this section a pair of unquestioning
repeaters called Ben Quinn and Archie Bland (how appropriate)
outright called me an ‘anti-Semite’ in the establishment propaganda
sheet, the London Guardian , with no supporting evidence. TheSabbatian Anti-Semitism Industry said so and who are they to
question that? They w ouldn’ t dare. Ironically ‘Semitic’ refers to a
group of languages in the Middle East that are almost entirely
Arabic. ‘ Anti-Semitism’ becomes ‘anti-Arab’ which if the
consequences of this misunderstanding w ere not so grav e w ould be
hilarious. Don’ t bother telling Quinn and Bland. I don’ t w ant to
confuse them, bless ‘em. One reason I am dubbed ‘anti-Semitic’ is
that I wrote in the 1990s that Jewish operativ es (Sabbatians) w ere
heavily inv olv ed in the Russian Rev olution when Sabbatians
ov erthrew the Romanov dynasty . This apparently made me ‘anti-
Semitic’. Oh, really? Here is a section from The Trigger :
British journalist Robert Wilton confirmed these themes in his 1920 book The Last Days of the
Romanovs when he studied official documents from the Russian government to identify the
members of the Bolshevik ruling elite between 1917 and 1919. The Central Committee
included 41 Jews among 62 members; the Council of the People’s Commissars had 17 Jews
out of 22 members; and 458 of the 556 most important Bolshevik positions between 1918 and
1919 were occupied by Jewish people. Only 17 were Russian. Then there were the 23 Jews
among the 36 members of the vicious Cheka Soviet secret police established in 1917 who
would soon appear all across the country.
Professor Robert Service of Oxford University, an expert on 20th century Russian history,
found evidence that [‘Jewish’] Leon Trotsky had sought to make sure that Jews were enrolled
in the Red Army and were disproportionately represented in the Soviet civil bureaucracy that
included the Cheka which performed mass arrests, imprisonment and executions of ‘enemies
of the people’. A US State Department Decimal File (861.00/5339) dated November 13th,
1918, names [Rothschild banking agent in America] Jacob Schiff and a list of ultra-Zionists as
funders of the Russian Revolution leading to claims of a ‘Jewish plot’, but the key point missed
by all is they were not ‘Jews’ – they were Sabbatian-Frankists.
Britain’ s W inston Churchill made the same error by mistake or
otherwise. He wrote in a 1920 edition of the Illustrated Sunday Herald
that those behind the Russian rev olution w ere part of a ‘w orldwide
conspiracy for the ov erthrow of civilisation and for the
reconstitution of society on the basis of arrested dev elopment, of
envious malev olence, and impossible equality’ (see ‘W oke’ today
because that has been created by the same netw ork). Churchill said
there w as no need to exaggerate the part play ed in the creation of
Bolshevism and in the actual bringing about of the RussianRev olution ‘by these international and for the most part atheistical
Jews’ [‘atheistical Jews’ = Sabbatians]. Churchill said it is certainly a
v ery great one and probably outw eighs all others: ‘W ith the notable
exception of Lenin, the majority of the leading ﬁgures are Jews.’ He
w ent on to describe, knowingly or not, the Sabbatian modus
operandi of placing puppet leaders nominally in pow er while they
control from the background:
Moreover, the principal inspiration and driving power comes from the Jewish leaders. Thus
Tchitcherin, a pure Russian, is eclipsed by his nominal subordinate, Litvinoff, and the
influence of Russians like Bukharin or Lunacharski cannot be compared with the power of
Trotsky, or of Zinovieff, the Dictator of the Red Citadel (Petrograd), or of Krassin or Radek – all
Jews. In the Soviet institutions the predominance of Jews is even more astonishing. And the
prominent, if not indeed the principal, part in the system of terrorism applied by the
Extraordinary Commissions for Combatting Counter-Revolution has been taken by Jews, and
in some notable cases by Jewesses.
What I said about seriously disproportionate inv olv ement in the
Russian Rev olution by Jewish ‘rev olutionaries’ (Sabbatians) is
prov able fact, but truth is no defence against the Sabbatian Anti-
Semitism Industry , its repeater parrots like Quinn and Bland, and
the now breathtaking netw ork of so-called ‘W oke’ ‘anti-hate’ groups
with interlocking leaderships and funding which hav e the role of
discrediting and silencing any one who gets too close to exposing the
Sabbatians. W e hav e seen ‘truth is no defence’ conﬁrmed in legal
judgements with the Saskatchew an Human Rights Commission in
Canada decreeing this: ‘T ruthful statements can be presented in a
manner that w ould meet the deﬁnition of hate speech, and not all
truthful statements must be free from restriction.’ Most ‘anti-hate’
activists, who are themselv es consumed by hatred, are too stupid
and ignorant of the w orld to know how they are being used. They
are far too far up their own virtue-signalling arses and it’ s far too
dark for them to see anything.
The ‘revolution’ game
The background and methods of the ‘Russian’ Rev olution are
straight from the Sabbatian playbook seen in the French Rev olutionand endless others around the w orld that appear to start as a
rev olution of the people against tyrannical rule and end up with a
regime change to more tyrannical rule ov ertly or cov ertly . W ars,
terror a acks and regime ov erthrows follow the Sabbatian cult
through history with its agents creating them as Problem-Reaction-
Solutions to remov e opposition on the road to w orld domination.
Sabbatian dots connect the Rothschilds with the Illuminati, Jacobins
of the French Rev olution, the ‘Bund’ or League of the Just, the
International Communist P arty , Communist League and the
Communist Manifesto of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels that w ould
lead to the Rothschild-funded Russian Rev olution. The sequence
comes under the heading of ‘creativ e destruction’ when y ou adv ance
to y our global goal by continually destroying the status quo to install
a new status quo which y ou then also destroy . The tw o w orld w ars
come to mind. W ith each new status quo y ou mov e closer to y our
planned outcome. W ars and mass murder are to Sabbatians a
collectiv e blood sacriﬁce ritual. They are obsessed with death for
many reasons and one is that death is an inv ersion of life. Satanists
and Sabbatians are obsessed with death and o en target churches
and churchy ards for their rituals. Inv ersion-obsessed Sabbatians
explain the use of inv erted symbolism including the inverted
pentagram and inverted  cross. The inv ersion of the cross has been
related to targeting Christianity , but the cross w as a religious symbol
long before Christianity and its inv ersion is a statement about the
Sabbatian mentality and goals more than any single religion.
Sabbatians operating in Germany w ere behind the rise of the
occult-obsessed Nazis and the subsequent Jewish exodus from
Germany and Europe to P alestine and the United States a er W orld
W ar T w o. The Rothschild dynasty w as at the forefront of this both as
political manipulators and by funding the operation. Why w ould
Sabbatians help to orchestrate the horrors inﬂicted on Jews by the
Nazis and by Stalin a er they organised the Russian Rev olution?
Sabbatians hate Jews and their religion, that’ s why . They pose as
Jews and secure positions of control within Jewish society and play
the ‘anti-Semitism’ card to protect themselv es from exposurethrough a global netw ork of organisations answ ering to the
Sabbatian-created-and-controlled globe-spanning intelligence
netw ork that inv olv es a stunning w eb of military-intelligence
operativ es and operations for a tiny country of just nine million.
Among them are Jewish assets who are not Sabbatians but hav e been
convinced by them that what they are doing is for the good of Israel
and the Jewish community to protect them from what they hav e
been programmed since childhood to believ e is a Jew-hating hostile
w orld. The Jewish community is just a highly conv enient cov er to
hide the true nature of Sabbatians. Any one ge ing close to exposing
their game is accused by Sabbatian place-people and gofers of ‘anti-
Semitism’ and claiming that all Jews are part of a plot to take ov er
the w orld. I am not saying that. I am saying that Sabbatians – the real
Jew-haters – hav e inﬁltrated the Jewish community to use them both
as a cov er and an ‘anti-Semitic’ defence against exposure. Thus w e
hav e the Anti-Semitism Industry targeted researchers in this w ay
and most Jewish people think this is justiﬁed and genuine. They
don’ t know that their ‘Jewish’ leaders and institutions of state,
intelligence and military are not controlled by Jews at all, but cultists
and stooges of Sabbatian-Frankism. I once added my name to a pro-
Jewish freedom petition online and the next time I looked my name
w as gone and text had been added to the petition blurb to a ack me
as an ‘anti-Semite’ such is the scale of perceptual programming.
Moving on America
I tell the story in The Trigger  and a chapter called ‘ Atlantic Crossing’
how particularly a er Israel w as established the Sabbatians mov ed
in on the United States and ev entually grasped control of
gov ernment administration, the political system via both Democrats
and Republicans, the intelligence community like the CIA and
National Security Agency (NSA), the P entagon and mass media.
Through this seriously compartmentalised netw ork Sabbatians and
their operativ es in Mossad, Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) and US
agencies pulled oﬀ 9/11 and blamed it on 19 ‘ Al-Qaeda hĳackers’
dominated by men from, or connected to, Sabbatian-ruled SaudiArabia. The ‘19’ w ere not ev en on the planes let alone ﬂew those big
passenger jets into buildings while being largely incompetent at
piloting one-engine light aircra . ‘Hĳacker ’ Hani Hanjour who is
said to hav e ﬂown American Airlines Flight 77 into the P entagon
with a turn and manoeuvre most professional pilots said they w ould
hav e struggled to do w as banned from renting a small plane by
instructors at the Freew ay Airport in Bowie, Maryland, just six weeks
earlier on the grounds that he w as an incompetent pilot. The Jewish
population of the w orld is just 0.2 percent with ev en that almost
entirely concentrated in Israel (75 percent Jewish) and the United
States (around tw o percent). This tw o percent and globally 0.2
percent refers to Jewish  people and not Sabbatian interlopers who are
a fraction of that fraction. What a sobering thought when y ou think
of the fantastic inﬂuence on w orld aﬀairs of tiny Israel and that the
Project for the New America Century (PNAC) which laid out the
blueprint in September , 2000, for America’ s w ar on terror and regime
change w ars in Iraq, Liby a and Syria w as founded and dominated by
Sabbatians known as ‘Neocons’. The document conceded that this
plan w ould not be supported politically or publicly without a major
a ack on American soil and a Problem-Reaction-Solution excuse to
send troops to w ar across the Middle East. Sabbatian Neocons said:
... [The] process of transformation ... [war and regime change] ... is likely to be a long one,
absent some catastrophic and catalysing event – like a new Pearl Harbor.
Four months later many of those who produced that document
came to pow er with their inane puppet George Bush from the long-
time Sabbatian Bush family . They included Sabbatian Dick Cheney
who w as oﬃcially vice-president, but really de-facto president for
the entirety of the ‘Bush’ gov ernment. Nine months a er the ‘Bush’
inauguration came what Bush called at the time ‘the P earl Harbor of
the 21st century’ and with typical Sabbatian timing and symbolism
2001 w as the 60th anniv ersary of the a ack in 1941 by the Japanese
Air Force on P earl Harbor , Haw aii, which allow ed President
Franklin Delano Roosev elt to take the United States into a Sabbatian-instigated Second W orld W ar that he said in his election campaign
that he nev er w ould. The evidence is ov erwhelming that Roosev elt
and his military and intelligence netw orks knew the a ack w as
coming and did nothing to stop it, but they did make sure that
America’ s most essential nav al ships w ere not in Haw aii at the time.
Three thousand Americans died in the P earl Harbor a acks as they
did on September 11th. By the 9/11 y ear of 2001 Sabbatians had
widely inﬁltrated the US gov ernment, military and intelligence
operations and used their compartmentalised assets to pull oﬀ the
‘ Al-Qaeda’ a acks. If y ou read The Trigger  it will blow y our mind to
see the u erly staggering concentration of ‘Jewish’ operativ es
(Sabbatian inﬁltrators) in essential positions of political, security ,
legal, law enforcement, ﬁnancial and business pow er before, during,
and a er the a acks to make them happen, carry them out, and then
cov er their tracks – and I do mean staggering  when y ou think of that
0.2 percent of the w orld population and tw o percent of Americans
which are Jewish while Sabbatian inﬁltrators are a fraction of that. A
central foundation of the 9/11 conspiracy w as the hĳacking of
gov ernment, military , Air Force and intelligence computer systems
in real time through ‘back-door ’ access made possible by Israeli
(Sabbatian) ‘cyber security’ so w are. Sabbatian-controlled Israel is
on the w ay to riv alling Silicon V alley for domination of cyberspace
and is becoming the dominant force in cyber -security which giv es
them access to entire computer systems and their passcodes across
the w orld. Then add to this that Zionists head (oﬃcially) Silicon
V alley giants like Google (Larry P age and Sergey Brin), Google-
owned Y ouT ube (Susan W ojcicki), Facebook (Mark Zuckerberg and
Sheryl Sandberg), and Apple (Chairman Arthur D. Levinson), and
that ultra-Zionist hedge fund billionaire P aul Singer has a $1 billion
stake in T wi er which is only nominally headed by ‘CEO’ pothead
Jack Dorsey . As cable news host T ucker Carlson said of Dorsey:
‘There used to be debate in the medical community whether
dropping a ton of acid had permanent eﬀects and I think that debate
has now ended.’ Carlson made the comment a er Dorsey told a
hearing on Capitol Hill (if y ou cut through his bullshit) that hebeliev ed in free speech so long as he got to decide what y ou can hear
and see. These ‘big names’ of Silicon V alley are only front men and
w omen for the Global Cult, not least the Sabbatians, who are the true
controllers of these corporations. Does any one still w onder why
these same people and companies hav e been ferociously censoring
and banning people (like me) for exposing any aspect of the Cult
agenda and especially the truth about the ‘Covid’ hoax which
Sabbatians hav e orchestrated?
The Jeﬀrey Epstein paedophile ring w as a Sabbatian operation. He
w as oﬃcially ‘Jewish’ but he w as a Sabbatian and w omen abused by
the ring hav e told me about the high number of ‘Jewish’ people
inv olv ed. The Epstein horror has Sabbatian wri en all ov er it and
matches perfectly their modus operandi and obsession with sex and
ritual. Epstein w as running a Sabbatian blackmail ring in which
famous people with political and other inﬂuence w ere provided
with y oung girls for sex while ev erything w as being ﬁlmed and
recorded on hidden cameras and microphones at his New Y ork
house, Caribbean island and other properties. Epstein surviv ors
hav e described this surv eillance system to me and some hav e gone
public. Once the famous politician or other ﬁgure knew he or she
w as on video they tended to do whatev er they w ere told. Here w e go
again …when y ou’v e got them by the balls their hearts and minds
will follow . Sabbatians use this blackmail technique on a wide scale
across the w orld to entrap politicians and others they need to act as
demanded. Epstein’ s priv ate plane, the infamous ‘Lolita Express’,
had many w ell-known passengers including Bill Clinton while Bill
Gates has ﬂown on an Epstein plane and met with him four y ears
a er Epstein had been jailed for paedophilia. They subsequently met
many times at Epstein’ s home in New Y ork according to a witness
who w as there. Epstein’ s infamous side-kick w as Ghislaine Maxw ell,
daughter of Mossad agent and ultra-Zionist mega-crooked British
businessman, Bob Maxw ell, who at one time owned the Daily Mirror
newspaper . Maxw ell w as murdered at sea on his boat in 1991 by
Sabbatian-controlled Mossad when he became a liability with hisbusiness empire collapsing as a former Mossad operativ e has
conﬁrmed (see The Trigger ).
Money, money, money, funny money …
Before I come to the Sabbatian connection with the last three US
presidents I will lay out the crucial importance to Sabbatians of
controlling banking and ﬁnance. Sabbatian May er Amschel
Rothschild set out to dominate this arena in his family’ s quest for
total global control. What is freedom? It is, in eﬀect, choice. The
more choices y ou hav e the freer y ou are and the few er y our choices
the more y ou are enslav ed. In the global structure created ov er
centuries by Sabbatians the biggest decider and restrictor of choice is
… money . Across the w orld if y ou ask people what they w ould like
to do with their liv es and why they are not doing that they will reply
‘I don’ t hav e the money’. This is the idea. A global elite of multi-
billionaires are described as ‘greedy’ and that is true on one lev el;
but control of money – who has it and who doesn’ t – is not primarily
about greed. It’ s about control. Sabbatians hav e seized ev er more
control of ﬁnance and sucked the w ealth of the w orld out of the
hands of the population. W e talk now , a er all, about the ‘One-
percent’ and ev en then the w ealthiest are a lot few er ev en than that.
This has been made possible by a money scam so outrageous and so
v ast it could rightly be called the scam of scams founded on creating
‘money’ out of nothing and ‘loaning’ that with interest to the
population. Money out of nothing is called ‘credit’. Sabbatians hav e
asserted control ov er gov ernments and banking ev er more
completely through the centuries and secured ﬁnancial laws that
allow banks to lend hugely more than they hav e on deposit in a
conﬁdence trick known as fractional reserv e lending. Imagine if y ou
could lend money that doesn’ t exist and charge the recipient interest
for doing so. Y ou w ould end up in jail. Bankers by contrast end up in
mansions, priv ate jets, Malibu and Monaco.
Banks are only required to keep a fraction of their deposits and
w ealth in their v aults and they are allow ed to lend ‘money’ they
don’ t hav e called ‘credit. Go into a bank for a loan and if y ou succeedthe banker will not mov e any real w ealth into y our account. They
will type into y our account the amount of the agreed ‘loan’ – say
£100,000. This is not w ealth that really exists; it is non-existent, fresh-
air , created-out-of-nothing ‘credit’ which has nev er , does not, and
will nev er exist except in theory . Credit is backed by nothing except
wind and only has buying pow er because people think that it has
buying pow er and accept it in return for property , goods and
services. I hav e described this situation as like those cartoon
characters y ou see chasing each other and when they run ov er the
edge of a cliﬀ they keep running forw ard on fresh air until one of
them looks down, realises what’ s happened, and they all crash into
the ravine. The whole foundation of the Sabbatian ﬁnancial system is
to stop people looking down except for periodic moments when they
w ant to crash the system (as in 2008 and 2020 ongoing) and reap the
rew ards from all the property , businesses and w ealth their borrow ers
had signed ov er as ‘collateral’ in return for a ‘loan’ of fresh air . Most
people think that money is somehow created by gov ernments when
it comes into existence from the start as a debt through banks
‘lending’ illusory money called credit. Y es, the v ery currency of
exchange is a debt  from day one issued as an interest-bearing loan.
Why don’ t gov ernments create money interest-free and lend it to
their people interest-free? Gov ernments are controlled by Sabbatians
and the ﬁnancial system is controlled by Sabbatians for whom
interest-free money w ould be a nightmare come true. Sabbatians
underpin their ﬁnancial domination through their global netw ork of
central banks, including the priv ately-owned US Federal Reserv e
and Britain’ s Bank of England, and this is orchestrated by a
priv ately-owned central bank coordination body called the Bank for
International Se lements in Basle, Switzerland, created by the usual
suspects including the Rockefellers and Rothschilds. Central bank
chiefs don’ t answ er to gov ernments or the people. They answ er to
the Bank for International Se lements or , in other w ords, the Global
Cult which is dominated today by Sabbatians.
Built-in disasterThere are so many constituent scams within the ov erall banking
scam. When y ou take out a loan of thin-air credit only the amount of
that loan is theoretically brought into circulation to add to the
amount in circulation; but y ou are paying back the principle plus
interest. The additional interest is not created and this means that
with ev ery ‘loan’ there is a shortfall in the money in circulation
betw een what is borrow ed and what has to be paid back. There is
nev er ev en close to enough money in circulation to repay all
outstanding public and priv ate debt including interest. Coldly
w eav ed in the v ery fabric of the system is the certainty that some
will lose their homes, businesses and possessions to the banking
‘lender ’. This is less obvious in times of ‘boom’ when the amount of
money in circulation (and the debt) is expanding through more
people w anting and ge ing loans. When a downturn comes and the
money supply contracts it becomes painfully obvious that there is
not enough money to service all debt and interest. This is less
obvious in times of ‘boom’ when the amount of money in circulation
(and the debt) is expanding through more people w anting and
ge ing loans. When a downturn comes and the money supply
contracts and it becomes painfully obvious – as in 2008 and currently
– that there is not enough money to service all debt and interest.
Sabbatian banksters hav e been leading the human population
through a calculated series of booms (more debt incurred) and busts
(when the debt can’ t be repaid and the banks get the debtor ’ s
tangible w ealth in exchange for non-existent ‘credit’). W ith each
‘bust’ Sabbatian bankers hav e absorbed more of the w orld’ s tangible
w ealth and w e end up with the One-percent. Gov ernments are in
bankruptcy lev els of debt to the same system and are therefore
owned by a system they do not control. The Federal Reserv e,
‘ America’ s central bank’, is priv ately-owned and American
presidents only nominally appoint its chairman or w oman to
maintain the illusion that it’ s an arm of gov ernment. It’ s not. The
‘Fed’ is a cartel of priv ate banks which handed billions to its
associates and friends a er the crash of 2008 and has been Sabbatian-
controlled since it w as manipulated into being in 1913 through the
cov ert trickery of Rothschild banking agents Jacob Schiﬀ and P aulW arburg, and the Sabbatian Rockefeller family . Somehow from a
Jewish population of tw o-percent and globally 0.2 percent (Sabbatian
interlopers remember are far smaller) ultra-Zionists headed the
Federal Reserv e for 31 y ears betw een 1987 and 2018 in the form of
Alan Greenspan, Bernard Bernanke and Janet Y ellen (now Biden’ s
T reasury Secretary) with Y ellen’ s deputy chairman a Israeli-
American duel citizen and ultra-Zionist Stanley Fischer , a former
gov ernor of the Bank of Israel. Ultra-Zionist Fed chiefs spanned the
presidencies of Ronald Reagan (‘Republican’), Father George Bush
(‘Republican’), Bill Clinton (‘Democrat’), Boy George Bush
(‘Republican’) and Barack Obama (‘Democrat’). W e should really
add the pre-Greenspan chairman, P aul Adolph V olcker , ‘appointed’
by Jimmy Carter (‘Democrat’) who ran the Fed betw een 1979 and
1987 during the Carter and Reagan administrations before
Greenspan took ov er . V olcker w as a long-time associate and business
partner of the Rothschilds. No ma er what the ‘party’ oﬃcially in
pow er the United States economy w as directed by the same force.
Here are members of the Obama, T rump and Biden administrations
and see if y ou can make out a common theme.
Barack Obama (‘Democrat’)
Ultra-Zionists Robert Rubin, Larry Summers, and Timothy Geithner
ran the US T reasury in the Clinton administration and tw o of them
reappeared with Obama. Ultra-Zionist Fed chairman Alan
Greenspan had manipulated the crash of 2008 through deregulation
and jumped ship just before the disaster to make w ay for ultra-
Zionist Bernard Bernanke to hand out trillions to Sabbatian ‘too big
to fail’ banks and businesses, including the ubiquitous ultra-Zionist
Goldman Sachs which has an ongoing staﬀ rev olving door operation
betw een itself and major ﬁnancial positions in gov ernment
w orldwide. Obama inherited the fallout of the crash when he took
oﬃce in January , 2009, and fortunately he had the support of his
ultra-Zionist White House Chief of Staﬀ Rahm Emmanuel, son of a
terrorist who helped to bomb Israel into being in 1948, and his ultra-
Zionist senior adviser David Axelrod, chief strategist in Obama’ s tw osuccessful presidential campaigns. Emmanuel, later may or of
Chicago and former senior fundraiser and strategist for Bill Clinton,
is an example of the Sabbatian policy a er Israel w as established of
migrating insider families to America so their children w ould be
born American citizens. ‘Obama’ chose this ﬁnancial team
throughout his administration to respond to the Sabbatian-instigated
crisis:
Timothy Geithner (ultra-Zionist) T reasury Secretary; Jacob J. Lew ,
T reasury Secretary; Larry Summers (ultra-Zionist), director of the
White House National Economic Council; P aul Adolph V olcker
(Rothschild business partner), chairman of the Economic Recov ery
Advisory Board; P eter Orszag (ultra-Zionist), director of the Oﬃce of
Management and Budget ov erseeing all gov ernment spending;
P enny Pritzker (ultra-Zionist), Commerce Secretary; Jared Bernstein
(ultra-Zionist), chief economist and economic policy adviser to V ice
President Joe Biden; Mary Schapiro (ultra-Zionist), chair of the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC); Gary Gensler (ultra-
Zionist), chairman of the Commodity Futures T rading Commission
(CFTC); Sheila Bair (ultra-Zionist), chair of the Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation (FDIC); Karen Mills (ultra-Zionist), head of
the Small Business Administration (SBA); Kenneth Feinberg (ultra-
Zionist), Special Master for Executiv e [bail-out] Compensation.
Feinberg w ould be appointed to ov ersee compensation (with strings)
to 9/11 victims and families in a campaign to stop them having their
day in court to question the oﬃcial story . At the same time ultra-
Zionist Bernard Bernanke w as chairman of the Federal Reserv e and
these are only some of the ultra-Zionists with allegiance to
Sabbatian-controlled Israel in the Obama gov ernment. Obama’ s
biggest corporate donor w as ultra-Zionist Goldman Sachs which had
employ ed many in his administration.
Donald Trump (‘Republican’)
T rump claimed to be an outsider (he w asn’ t) who had come to ‘drain
the sw amp’. He embarked on this goal by immediately appointing
ultra-Zionist Stev e Mnuchin, a Goldman Sachs employ ee for 17y ears, as his T reasury Secretary . Others included Gary Cohn (ultra-
Zionist), chief operating oﬃcer of Goldman Sachs, his ﬁrst Director
of the National Economic Council and chief economic adviser , who
w as later replaced by Larry Kudlow (ultra-Zionist). T rump’ s senior
adviser throughout his four y ears in the White House w as his
sinister son-in-law Jared Kushner , a life-long friend of Israel Prime
Minister Benjamin Netany ahu. Kushner is the son of a convicted
crook who w as pardoned by T rump in his last days in oﬃce. Other
ultra-Zionists in the T rump administration included: Stephen Miller ,
Senior P olicy Adviser; A vrahm Berkowitz, Deputy Adviser to T rump
and his Senior Adviser Jared Kushner; Iv anka T rump, Adviser to the
President, who conv erted to Judaism when she married Jared
Kushner; David Friedman, T rump lawy er and Ambassador to Israel;
Jason Greenbla , T rump Organization executiv e vice president and
chief legal oﬃcer , who w as made Special Representativ e for
International Negotiations and the Israeli-P alestinian Conﬂict; Rod
Rosenstein, Deputy A orney General; Elliot Abrams, Special
Representativ e for V enezuela, then Iran; John Eisenberg, National
Security Council Legal Adviser and Deputy Council to the President
for National Security Aﬀairs; Anne Neuberger , Deputy National
Manager , National Security Agency; Ezra Cohen- W atnick, Acting
Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence; Elan Carr , Special Env oy
to monitor and combat anti-Semitism; Len Khodorkovsky , Deputy
Special Env oy to monitor and combat anti-Semitism; Reed Cordish,
Assistant to the President, Intragov ernmental and T echnology
Initiativ es. T rump V ice President Mike P ence and Secretary of State
Mike P ompeo, both Christian Zionists, w ere also v ehement
supporters of Israel and its goals and ambitions.
Donald ‘free-speech believ er ’ T rump pardoned a number of
ﬁnancial and violent criminals while ignoring calls to pardon Julian
Assange and Edw ard Snowden whose crimes are rev ealing highly
relev ant information about gov ernment manipulation and
corruption and the widespread illegal surv eillance of the American
people by US ‘security’ agencies. It’ s so good to know that T rump is
on the side of freedom and justice and not mega-criminals withallegiance to Sabbatian-controlled Israel. These included a pardon
for Israeli spy Jonathan P ollard who w as jailed for life in 1987 under
the Espionage Act. A viem Sella, the Mossad agent who recruited
P ollard, w as also pardoned by T rump while Assange sat in jail and
Snowden remained in exile in Russia. Sella had ‘ﬂed’ (w as helped to
escape) to Israel in 1987 and w as nev er extradited despite being
charged under the Espionage Act. A T rump White House statement
said that Sella’ s clemency had been ‘supported by Benjamin
Netany ahu, Ron Dermer , Israel’ s US Ambassador , David Friedman,
US Ambassador to Israel and Miriam Adelson, wife of leading
T rump donor Sheldon Adelson who died shortly before. Other
friends of Jared Kushner w ere pardoned along with Sholom W eiss
who w as believ ed to be serving the longest-ev er white-collar prison
sentence of more than 800 y ears in 2000. The sentence w as
commuted of P onzi-schemer Eliy ahu W einstein who defrauded Jews
and others out of $200 million. I did mention that Assange and
Snowden w ere ignored, right? T rump gav e Sabbatians almost
ev erything they asked for in military and political support, moving
the US Embassy from T el A viv to Jerusalem with its critical symbolic
and literal implications for P alestinian statehood, and the ‘deal of the
Century’ designed by Jared Kushner and David Friedman which
gav e the Sabbatian Israeli gov ernment the green light to
substantially expand its already widespread program of building
illegal Jewish-only se lements in the occupied land of the W est
Bank. This made a tw o-state ‘solution’ impossible by seizing all the
land of a potential P alestinian homeland and that had been the plan
since 1948 and then 1967 when the Arab-controlled Gaza Strip, W est
Bank, Sinai P eninsula and Syrian Golan Heights w ere occupied by
Israel. All the talks about talks and road maps and delays hav e been
buying time until the W est Bank w as physically occupied by Israeli
real estate. T rump w ould hav e to be a monumentally ill-informed
idiot not to see that this w as the plan he w as helping to complete.
The T rump administration w as in so many w ays the Kushner
administration which means the Netany ahu administration which
means the Sabbatian administration. I understand why many
opposing Cult fascism in all its forms gravitated to T rump, but hew as a crucial part of the Sabbatian plan and I will deal with this in
the next chapter .
Joe Biden (‘Democrat’)
A barely cognitiv e Joe Biden took ov er the presidency in January ,
2021, along with his fellow empty shell, V ice-President Kamala
Harris, as the latest Sabbatian gofers to enter the White House.
Names on the door may hav e changed and the ‘party’ – the force
behind them remained the same as Zionists w ere appointed to a
stream of piv otal areas relating to Sabbatian plans and policy . They
included: Janet Y ellen, T reasury Secretary , former head of the Federal
Reserv e, and still another ultra-Zionist running the US T reasury a er
Mnuchin (T rump), Lew and Geithner (Obama), and Summers and
Rubin (Clinton); Anthony Blinken, Secretary of State; W endy
Sherman, Deputy Secretary of State (so that’ s ‘Biden’ s’ Sabbatian
foreign policy sorted); Jeﬀ Zients, White House coronavirus
coordinator; Rochelle W alensky , head of the Centers for Disease
Control; Rachel Levine, transgender deputy health secretary (that’ s
‘Covid’ hoax policy under control); Merrick Garland, A orney
General; Alejandro May orkas, Secretary of Homeland Security; Cass
Sunstein, Homeland Security with responsibility for new
immigration laws; A vril Haines, Director of National Intelligence;
Anne Neuberger , National Security Agency cybersecurity director
(note, cybersecurity); David Cohen, CIA Deputy Director; Ronald
Klain, Biden’ s Chief of Staﬀ (see Rahm Emanuel); Eric Lander , a
‘leading geneticist’, Oﬃce of Science and T echnology P olicy director
(see Smart Grid, synthetic biology agenda); Jessica Rosenw orcel,
acting head of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
which controls Smart Grid technology policy and electromagnetic
communication systems including 5G. How can it be that so many
piv otal positions are held by tw o-percent of the American
population and 0.2 percent of the w orld population administration
a er administration no ma er who is the president and what is the
party? It’ s a coincidence? Of course it’ s not and this is why
Sabbatians hav e built their colossal global w eb of interlocking ‘anti-hate’ hate groups to condemn any one who asks these glaring
questions as an ‘anti-Semite’. The w ay that Jewish people horriﬁcally
abused in Sabbatian-backed Nazi Germany are exploited to this end
is stomach-turning and disgusting bey ond w ords.
Political fusion
Sabbatian manipulation has rev ersed the roles of Republicans and
Democrats and the same has happened in Britain with the
Conserv ativ e and Labour P arties. Republicans and Conserv ativ es
w ere alw ays labelled the ‘right’ and Democrats and Labour the ‘le ’,
but look at the policy positions now and the Democrat-Labour ‘le ’
has mov ed further to the ‘right’ than Republicans and Conserv ativ es
under the banner of ‘W oke’, the Cult-created far -right tyranny .
Where once the Democrat-Labour ‘le ’ defended free speech and
human rights they now seek to delete them and as I said earlier
despite the ‘Covid’ fascism of the Jackboot Johnson Conserv ativ e
gov ernment in the UK the Labour P arty of leader Keir Starmer
demanded ev en more extreme measures. The Labour P arty has been
v ery publicly absorbed by Sabbatians a er a political and media
onslaught against the previous leader , the w eak and inept Jeremy
Corbyn, ov er made-up allegations of ‘anti-Semitism’ both by him
and his party . The plan w as clear with this ‘anti-Semite’ propaganda
and what w as required in response w as a swi  and decisiv e ‘fuck
oﬀ ’ from Corbyn and a statement to expose the Anti-Semitism
Industry (Sabbatian) a empt to silence Labour criticism of the Israeli
gov ernment (Sabbatians) and purge the party of all dissent against
the extremes of ultra-Zionism (Sabbatians). Instead Corbyn and his
party fell to their knees and appeased the abusers which, by
deﬁnition, is impossible. Appeasing one demand leads only to a new
demand to be appeased until takeov er is complete. Like I say – ‘fuck
oﬀ ’ w ould hav e been a much more eﬀectiv e policy and I hav e used it
myself with great eﬀect ov er the y ears when Sabbatians are on my
case which is most of the time. I consider that fact a great
compliment, by the w ay . The outcome of the Labour P arty
capitulation is that w e now hav e a Sabbatian-controlledConserv ativ e P arty ‘opposed’ by a Sabbatian-controlled Labour
P arty in a one-party Sabbatian state that hurtles tow ards the
extremes of tyranny (the Sabbatian cult agenda). In America the
situation is the same. Labour ’ s Keir Starmer spends his days on his
knees with his tongue out pointing to T el A viv , or I guess now
Jerusalem, while Boris Johnson has an ‘anti-Semitism czar ’ in the
form of former Labour MP John Mann who keeps Starmer company
on his pray er mat.
Sabbatian inﬂuence can be seen in Jewish members of the Labour
P arty who hav e been ejected for criticism of Israel including those
from families that suﬀered in Nazi Germany . Sabbatians despise real
Jewish people and target them ev en more harshly because it is so
much more diﬃcult to dub them ‘anti-Semitic’ although in their
desperation they do try .ICHAPTER THREE
The Pushbacker sting
Until you realize how easy it is for your mind to be manipulated, you
remain the puppet of someone else’s game
Evita Ochel
will use the presidencies of T rump and Biden to show how the
manipulation of the one-party state plays out behind the illusion
of political choice across the w orld. No tw o presidencies could – on
the face of it – be more diﬀerent and apparently at odds in terms of
direction and policy .
A Renegade Mind sees bey ond the obvious and focuses on
outcomes and consequences and not image, w ords and w aﬄe. The
Cult embarked on a campaign to divide America betw een those who
blindly support its agenda (the mentality known as ‘W oke’) and
those who are pushing back on where the Cult and its Sabbatians
w ant to go. This presents inﬁnite possibilities for dividing and ruling
the population by se ing them at w ar with each other and allows a
perceptual ring fence of demonisation to encircle the Pushbackers in
a modern v ersion of the Li le Big Horn in 1876 when American
cav alry led by Lieutenant Colonel George Custer w ere drawn into a
trap, surrounded and killed by Nativ e American tribes defending
their land of thousands of y ears from being seized by the
gov ernment. In this modern v ersion the roles are rev ersed and it’ s
those defending themselv es from the Sabbatian gov ernment who are
surrounded and the gov ernment that’ s seeking to destroy them. This
trap w as set y ears ago and to explain how w e must return to 2016and the emergence of Donald T rump as a candidate to be President
of the United States. He set out to ov ercome the best part of 20 other
candidates in the Republican P arty before and during the primaries
and w as not considered by many in those early stages to hav e a
pray er of living in the White House. The Republican P arty w as said
to hav e great reserv ations about T rump and y et somehow he w on
the nomination. When y ou know how American politics w orks –
politics in general – there is no w ay that T rump could hav e become
the party’ s candidate unless the Sabbatian-controlled ‘Neocons’ that
run the Republican P arty w anted that to happen. W e saw the proof
in emails and documents made public by W ikiLeaks that the
Democratic P arty hierarchy , or Democons, systematically
undermined the campaign of Bernie Sanders to make sure that
Sabbatian gofer Hillary Clinton w on the nomination to be their
presidential candidate. If the Democons could do that then the
Neocons in the Republican P arty could hav e derailed T rump in the
same w ay . But they didn’ t and at that stage I began to conclude that
T rump could w ell be the one chosen to be president. If that w as the
case the ‘why’ w as pre y clear to see – the goal of dividing America
betw een Cult agenda-supporting W okers and Pushbackers who
gravitated to T rump because he w as telling them what they w anted
to hear . His constituency of support had been increasingly ignored
and v oiceless for decades and profoundly through the eight y ears of
Sabbatian puppet Barack Obama. Now here w as someone speaking
their language of pulling back from the incessant globalisation of
political and economic pow er , the exporting of American jobs to
China and elsewhere by ‘ American’ (Sabbatian) corporations, the
deletion of free speech, and the mass immigration policies that had
further dev astated job opportunities for the urban w orking class of
all races and the once American heartlands of the Midw est.
Beware the forked tongue
Those people collectiv ely sighed with relief that at last a political
leader w as apparently on their side, but another trait of the
Renegade Mind is that y ou look ev en harder at people telling y ouwhat y ou w ant to hear than those who are telling y ou otherwise.
Obviously as I said earlier people wish what they w ant to hear to be
true and genuine and they are much more likely to believ e that than
someone saying what they don’ t w ant to here and don’ t w ant to be
true. Sales people are taught to be skilled in eliciting by calculated
questioning what their customers w ant to hear and repeating that
back to them as their own opinion to get their targets to like and
trust them. Assets of the Cult are also sales people in the sense of
selling perception. T o read Cult manipulation y ou hav e to play the
long and expanded game and not fall for the V audeville show of
party politics. Both American parties are v ehicles for the Cult and
they exploit them in diﬀerent w ays depending on what the agenda
requires at that moment. T rump and the Republicans w ere used to
be the focus of dividing America and isolating Pushbackers to open
the w ay for a Biden presidency to become the most extreme in
American history by adv ancing the full-blown W oke (Cult) agenda
with the aim of destroying and silencing Pushbackers now labelled
Nazi T rump supporters and white supremacists.
Sabbatians w anted T rump in oﬃce for the reasons described by
ultra-Zionist Saul Alinsky (1909-1972) who w as promoting the W oke
philosophy through ‘community organising’ long before any one had
heard of it. In those days it still w ent by its traditional name of
Marxism. The reason for the manipulated T rump phenomenon w as
laid out in Alinsky’ s 1971 book, Rules for Radicals , which w as his
blueprint for ov erthrowing democratic and other regimes and
replacing them with Sabbatian Marxism. Not surprisingly his to-do
list w as evident in the Sabbatian French and Russian ‘Rev olutions’
and that in China which will become v ery relev ant in the next
chapter about the ‘Covid’ hoax. Among Alinsky’ s follow ers hav e
been the deeply corrupt Barack Obama, House Speaker Nancy P elosi
and Hillary Clinton who described him as a ‘hero’. All three are
Sabbatian stooges with P elosi personifying the arrogant corrupt
idiocy that so widely fronts up for the Cult inner core. Predictably as
a Sabbatian adv ocate of the ‘light-bringer ’ Alinsky features Lucifer
on the dedication page of his book as the original radical who gainedhis own kingdom (‘Earth’ as w e shall see). One of Alinsky’ s golden
radical rules w as to pick an individual and focus all a ention, hatred
and blame on them and not to target faceless bureaucracies and
corporations. Rules for Radicals  is really a Sabbatian handbook with
its contents repeatedly employ ed all ov er the w orld for centuries and
why w ouldn’ t Sabbatians bring to pow er their designer -villain to be
used as the individual on which all a ention, hatred and blame w as
bestow ed? This is what they did and the only question for me is how
much T rump knew that and how much he w as manipulated. A bit of
both, I suspect. This w as Alinsky’ s T rump technique from a man
who died in 1972. The technique has spanned history:
Pick the target, freeze it, personalize it, polarize it. Don’t try to attack abstract corporations or
bureaucracies. Identify a responsible individual. Ignore attempts to shift or spread the blame.
From the moment T rump came to illusory pow er ev erything w as
about him. It w asn’ t about Republican policy or opinion, but all
about T rump. Ev erything he did w as presented in negativ e,
derogatory and abusiv e terms by the Sabbatian-dominated media
led by Cult operations such as CNN, MSNBC, The New York Times
and the Jeﬀ Bezos-owned Washington Post  – ‘Pick the target, freeze it,
personalize it, polarize it.’ T rump w as turned into a demon to be
viliﬁed by those who hated him and a demi-god lov ed by those who
w orshipped him. This, in turn, had his supporters, too, presented as
equally demonic in preparation for the punchline later down the line
when Biden w as about to take oﬃce. It w as here’ s a T rump, there’ s a
T rump, ev erywhere a T rump, T rump. V irtually ev ery news story or
happening w as ﬁltered through the lens of ‘The Donald’. Y ou lov ed
him or hated him and which one y ou chose w as said to deﬁne y ou as
Satan’ s spawn or a paragon of virtue. Ev en supporting some T rump
policies or statements and not others w as enough for an assault on
y our character . No shades of grey w ere or are allow ed. Ev erything is
black and white (literally and ﬁgurativ ely). A Californian I knew had
her head u erly scrambled by her hatred for T rump while telling
people they should lov e each other . She w as so totally consumed byT rump Derangement Syndrome as it became to be known that this
glaring contradiction w ould nev er hav e occurred to her . By
deﬁnition any one who criticised T rump or praised his opponents
w as a hero and this lady described Joe Biden as ‘a kind, honest
gentleman’ when he’ s a prov able liar , mega-crook and vicious piece
of w ork to boot. Sabbatians had indeed divided America using
T rump as the fall-guy and all along the clock w as ticking on the
consequences for his supporters.
In hock to his masters
T rump gav e Sabbatians via Israel almost ev erything they w anted in
his four y ears. Ask and y ou shall receiv e w as the dynamic betw een
himself and Benjamin Netany ahu orchestrated by T rump’ s ultra-
Zionist son-in-law Jared Kushner , his ultra-Zionist Ambassador to
Israel, David Friedman, and ultra-Zionist ‘Israel adviser ’, Jason
Greenbla . The last tw o w ere central to the running and protecting
from collapse of his business empire, the T rump Organisation, and
colossal business failures made him forev er beholding to Sabbatian
netw orks that bailed him out. By the start of the 1990s T rump ow ed
$4 billion to banks that he couldn’ t pay and almost $1billion of that
w as down to him personally and not his companies. This mega-
disaster w as the result of building tw o new casinos in Atlantic City
and buying the enormous T aj Mahal operation which led to
crippling debt payments. He had borrow ed fantastic sums from 72
banks with major Sabbatian connections and although the scale of
debt should hav e had him living in a tent alongside the highw ay
they nev er foreclosed. A plan w as devised to li  T rump from the
mire by BT Securities Corporation and Rothschild Inc. and the case
w as handled by W ilber Ross who had w orked for the Rothschilds for
27 y ears. Ross w ould be named US Commerce Secretary a er
T rump’ s election. Another crucial ﬁgure in saving T rump w as ultra-
Zionist ‘inv estor ’ Carl Icahn who bought the T aj Mahal casino. Icahn
w as made special economic adviser on ﬁnancial regulation in the
T rump administration. He didn’ t stay long but still managed to ﬁnd
time to make a tidy sum of a reported $31.3 million when he sold hisholdings aﬀected by the price of steel three days before T rump
imposed a 235 percent tariﬀ on steel imports. What amazing bits of
luck these people hav e. T rump and Sabbatian operativ es hav e long
had a close association and his mentor and legal adviser from the
early 1970s until 1986 w as the dark and genetically corrupt ultra-
Zionist Roy Cohn who w as chief counsel to Senator Joseph
McCarthy’ s ‘communist’ witch-hunt in the 1950s. Esquire  magazine
published an article about Cohn with the headline ‘Don’ t mess with
Roy Cohn’. He w as described as the most feared lawy er in New Y ork
and ‘a ruthless master of dirty tricks ... [with] ... more than one Maﬁa
Don on speed dial’. Cohn’ s inﬂuence, contacts, support and
protection made T rump a front man for Sabbatians in New Y ork
with their connections to one of Cohn’ s many criminal employ ers,
the ‘Russian’ Sabbatian Maﬁa. Israel-centric media mogul Rupert
Murdoch w as introduced to T rump by Cohn and they started a long
friendship. Cohn died in 1986 w eeks a er being disbarred for
unethical conduct by the Appellate Division of the New Y ork State
Supreme Court. The wheels of justice do indeed run slow giv en the
length of Cohn’ s crooked career .
QAnon-sense
W e are asked to believ e that Donald T rump with his fundamental
connections to Sabbatian netw orks and operativ es has been leading
the ﬁght to stop the Sabbatian agenda for the fascistic control of
America and the w orld. Sure he has. A man entrapped during his
y ears in the White House by Sabbatian operativ es and whose biggest
ﬁnancial donor w as casino billionaire Sheldon Adelson who w as
Sabbatian to his DNA?? Oh, do come on. T rump has been used to
divide America and isolate Pushbackers on the Cult agenda under
the heading of ‘T rump supporters’, ‘insurrectionists’ and ‘white
supremacists’. The US Intelligence/Mossad Psy op or psychological
operation known as QAnon emerged during the T rump y ears as a
central pillar in the Sabbatian campaign to lead Pushbackers into the
trap set by those that wished to destroy them. I knew from the start
that QAnon w as a scam because I had seen the same scenario manytimes before ov er 30 y ears under diﬀerent names and I had wri en
about one in particular in the books. ‘Not again’ w as my reaction
when QAnon came to the fore. The same script is pulled out ev ery
few y ears and a new name added to the le erhead. The story alw ays
takes the same form: ‘Insiders’ or ‘the good guys’ in the gov ernment-
intelligence-military ‘Deep State’ apparatus w ere going to instigate
mass arrests of the ‘bad guys’ which w ould include the Rockefellers,
Rothschilds, Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, George Soros, etc., etc.
Dates are giv en for when the ‘good guys’ are going to mov e in, but
the dates pass without incident and new dates are giv en which pass
without incident. The central message to Pushbackers in each case is
that they don’ t hav e to do anything because there is ‘a plan’ and it is
all going to be sorted by the ‘good guys’ on the inside. ‘T rust the
plan’ w as a QAnon mantra when the only plan w as to misdirect
Pushbackers into pu ing their trust in a Psy op they believ ed to be
real. Bew are, bew are, those who tell y ou what y ou w ant to hear and
alw ays check it out. Right up to Biden’ s inauguration QAnon w as
still claiming that ‘the Storm’ w as coming and T rump w ould stay on
as president when Biden and his cronies w ere arrested and jailed. It
w as nev er going to happen and of course it didn’ t, but what did
happen as a result provided that punchline to the Sabbatian
T rump/QAnon Psy op.
On January 6th, 2021, a v ery big crowd of T rump supporters
gathered in the National Mall in W ashington DC down from the
Capitol Building to protest at what they believ ed to be widespread
corruption and v ote fraud that stopped T rump being re-elected for a
second term as president in Nov ember , 2020. I say as someone that
does not support T rump or Biden that the evidence is clear that
major v ote-ﬁxing w ent on to fav our Biden, a man with cognitiv e
problems so adv anced he can o en hardly string a sentence together
without reading the w ords wri en for him on the T eleprompter .
Glaring ballot discrepancies included serious questions about
electronic v oting machines that make v ote rigging a comparativ e
cinch and hundreds of thousands of paper v otes that suddenly
appeared during already adv anced v ote counts and virtually all ofthem for Biden. Early T rump leads in crucial swing states suddenly
began to close and disappear . The pandemic hoax w as used as the
excuse to issue almost limitless numbers of mail-in ballots with no
checks to establish that the recipients w ere still aliv e or liv ed at that
address. They w ere sent to streams of people who had not ev en
asked for them. Priv ate organisations w ere employ ed to gather these
ballots and who knows what they did with them before they turned
up at the counts. The American election system has been
manipulated ov er decades to become a sick joke with more holes
than a Swiss cheese for the express purpose of dictating the results.
Then there w as the criminal manipulation of information by
Sabbatian tech giants like Facebook, T wi er and Google-owned
Y ouT ube which deleted pro- T rump, anti-Biden accounts and posts
while ev erything in support of Biden w as le  alone. Sabbatians
w anted Biden to win because a er the dividing of America it w as
time for full-on W oke and ev ery aspect of the Cult agenda to be
unleashed.
Hunter gatherer
Extreme Silicon V alley bias included blocking information by the
New York Post  exposing a Biden scandal that should hav e ended his
bid for president in the ﬁnal w eeks of the campaign. Hunter Biden,
his monumentally corrupt son, is reported to hav e sent a laptop to
be repaired at a local store and failed to return for it. Time passed
until the laptop became the property of the store for non-payment of
the bill. When the owner saw what w as on the hard driv e he gav e a
copy to the FBI who did nothing ev en though it conﬁrmed
widespread corruption in which the Joe Biden family w ere using his
political position, especially when he w as vice president to Obama,
to make multiple millions in countries around the w orld and most
notably Ukraine and China. Hunter Biden’ s one-time business
partner T ony Bobulinski w ent public when the story broke in the
New York Post  to conﬁrm the corruption he saw and that Joe Biden
not only knew what w as going on he also proﬁted from the spoils.
Millions w ere handed ov er by a Chinese company with closeconnections – like all major businesses in China – to the Chinese
communist party of President Xi Jinping. Joe Biden ev en boasted at a
meeting of the Cult’ s W orld Economic Forum that as vice president
he had ordered the gov ernment of Ukraine to ﬁre a prosecutor . What
he didn’ t mention w as that the same man just happened to be
inv estigating an energy company which w as part of Hunter Biden’ s
corrupt portfolio. The company w as paying him big bucks for no
other reason than the inﬂuence his father had. Ov ernight Biden’ s
presidential campaign should hav e been ov er giv en that he had lied
publicly about not knowing what his son w as doing. Instead almost
the entire Sabbatian-owned mainstream media and Sabbatian-
owned Silicon V alley suppressed circulation of the story . This alone
w ent a mighty w ay to rigging the election of 2020. Cult assets like
Mark Zuckerberg at Facebook also spent hundreds of millions to be
used in support of Biden and v ote ‘administration’.
The Cult had used T rump as the focus to divide America and w as
now desperate to bring in moronic, pliable, corrupt Biden to
complete the double-whammy . No w ay w ere they going to let li le
things like the will of the people thw art their plan. Silicon V alley
widely censored claims that the election w as rigged because it was
rigged. For the same reason any one claiming it w as rigged w as
denounced as a ‘white supremacist’ including the pathetically few
Republican politicians willing to say so. Right across the media
where the claim w as mentioned it w as described as a ‘false claim’
ev en though these excuses for ‘journalists’ w ould hav e done no
research into the subject whatsoev er . T rump w on sev en million more
v otes than any si ing president had ev er achiev ed while somehow a
cognitiv ely-challenged soon to be 78-y ear -old who w as hidden aw ay
from the public for most of the campaign managed to win more
v otes than any presidential candidate in history . It makes no sense.
Y ou only had to see election rallies for both candidates to witness the
enthusiasm for T rump and the apathy for Biden. T ens of thousands
w ould a end T rump ev ents while Biden w as speaking in empty car
parks with o en only television crews a ending and framing their
shots to hide the fact that no one w as there. It w as pathetic to seefootage come to light of Biden standing at a podium making
speeches only to TV crews and party ﬁxers while reading the w ords
wri en for him on massiv e T eleprompter screens. So, y es, those
protestors on January 6th had a point about election rigging, but
some w ere about to w alk into a trap laid for them in W ashington by
the Cult Deep State and its QAnon Psy op. This w as the Capitol Hill
riot ludicrously dubbed an ‘insurrection’.
The spider and the fly
Renegade Minds know there are not tw o ‘sides’ in politics, only one
side, the Cult, w orking through all ‘sides’. It’ s a stage show , a puppet
show , to direct the perceptions of the population into focusing on
div ersions like parties and candidates while missing the puppeteers
with their hands holding all the strings. The Capitol Hill
‘insurrection’ brings us back to the Li le Big Horn. Having created
tw o distinct opposing groupings – W oke and Pushbackers – the trap
w as about to be sprung. Pushbackers w ere to be encircled and
isolated by associating them all in the public mind with T rump and
then labelling T rump as some sort of Confederate leader . I knew
immediately that the Capitol riot w as a set-up because of tw o things.
One w as how easy the rioters got into the building with virtually no
credible resistance and secondly I could see – as with the ‘Covid’
hoax in the W est at the start of 2020 – how the Cult could exploit the
situation to mov e its agenda forw ard with great speed. My
experience of Cult techniques and activities ov er more than 30 y ears
has show ed me that while they do exploit situations they hav en’ t
themselv es created this nev er happens with ev ents of fundamental
agenda signiﬁcance. Ev ery time major ev ents giving cultists the
excuse to rapidly adv ance their plan y ou ﬁnd they are manipulated
into being for the speciﬁc reason of providing that excuse – Problem-
Reaction-Solution. Only a tiny minority of the huge crowd of
W ashington protestors sought to gain entry to the Capitol by
smashing windows and breaching doors. That didn’ t ma er . The
whole crowd and all Pushbackers, ev en if they did not support
T rump, w ere going to be lumped together as dangerousinsurrectionists and conspiracy theorists. The la er term came into
widespread use through a CIA memo in the 1960s aimed at
discrediting those questioning the nonsensical oﬃcial story of the
Kennedy assassination and it subsequently became widely
employ ed by the media. It’ s still being used by inept ‘journalists’
with no idea of its origin to discredit any one questioning anything
that authority claims to be true. When y ou are perpetrating a
conspiracy y ou need to discredit the v ery w ord itself ev en though
the dictionary deﬁnition of conspiracy is merely ‘the activity of
secretly planning with other people to do something bad or illegal‘
and ‘a general agreement to keep silent about a subject for the
purpose of keeping it secret’. On that basis there are conspiracies
almost wherev er y ou look. For obvious reasons the Cult and its
lapdog media hav e to claim there are no conspiracies ev en though
the w ord appears in state laws as with conspiracy to defraud, to
murder , and to corrupt public morals.
Agent prov ocateurs are widely used by the Cult Deep State to
manipulate genuine people into acting in w ays that suit the desired
outcome. By genuine in this case I mean protestors genuinely
supporting T rump and claims that the election w as stolen. In among
them, how ev er , w ere agents of the state w earing the garb of T rump
supporters and QAnon to pump-prime the Capital riot which some
genuine T rump supporters naiv ely fell for . I described the situation
as ‘Come into my parlour said the spider to the ﬂy’. Leaﬂets
appeared through the W oke paramilitary arm Antifa, the anti-fascist
fascists, calling on supporters to turn up in W ashington looking like
T rump supporters ev en though they hated him. Some of those
arrested for breaching the Capitol Building w ere sourced to Antifa
and its stable mate Black Liv es Ma er . Both organisations are funded
by Cult billionaires and corporations. One man charged for the riot
w as according to his lawy er a former FBI agent who had held top
secret security clearance for 40 y ears. A orney Thomas Plofchan said
of his client, 66-y ear -old Thomas Edw ard Caldw ell:
He has held a Top Secret Security Clearance since 1979 and has undergone multiple Special
Background Investigations in support of his clearances. After retiring from the Navy, heworked as a section chief for the Federal Bureau of Investigation from 2009-2010 as a GS-12
[mid-level employee].
He also formed and operated a consulting firm performing work, often classified, for U.S
government customers including the US. Drug Enforcement Agency, Department of Housing
and Urban Development, the US Coast Guard, and the US Army Personnel Command.
A judge later released Caldw ell pending trial in the absence of
evidence about a conspiracy or that he tried to force his w ay into the
building. The New York Post  reported a ‘law enforcement source‘ as
saying that ‘at least tw o known Antifa members w ere spo ed’ on
camera among T rump supporters during the riot while one of the
rioters arrested w as John Earle Sulliv an, a seriously extreme Black
Liv es Ma er T rump-hater from Utah who w as previously arrested
and charged in July , 2020, ov er a BLM-Antifa riot in which driv ers
w ere threatened and one w as shot. Sulliv an is the founder of Utah-
based Insurgence USA which is an aﬃliate of the Cult-created-and-
funded Black Liv es Ma er mov ement. Footage appeared and w as
then deleted by T wi er of T rump supporters calling out Antifa
inﬁltrators and a group w as ﬁlmed changing into pro- T rump
clothing before the riot. Security at the building w as pathetic  – as
planned. Colonel Leroy Fletcher Prouty , a man with long experience
in cov ert operations w orking with the US security apparatus, once
described the tell-tale sign to identify who is inv olv ed in an
assassination. He said:
No one has to direct an assassination – it happens. The active role is played secretly by
permitting it to happen. This is the greatest single clue. Who has the power to call off or
reduce the usual security precautions?
This principle applies to many other situations and certainly to the
Capitol riot of January 6th, 2021.
The sting
W ith such a big and potentially angry crowd known to be gathering
near the Capitol the security apparatus w ould hav e had a major
police detail to defend the building with National Guard troops onstandby giv en the strength of feeling among people arriving from all
ov er America encouraged by the QAnon Psy op and statements by
Donald T rump. Instead Capitol P olice ‘security’ w as ﬂimsy , w eak,
and easily breached. The same number of oﬃcers w as deploy ed as
on a regular day and that is a blatant red ﬂag. They w ere not staﬀed
or equipped for a possible riot that had been an obvious possibility
in the circumstances. No protectiv e and eﬀectiv e fencing w orth the
name w as put in place and there w ere no contingency plans. The
whole thing w as basically a case of standing aside and w aving
people in. Once inside police mostly backed oﬀ apart from one
Capitol police oﬃcer who ridiculously shot dead unarmed Air Force
v eteran protestor Ashli Babbi  without a w arning as she climbed
through a broken window . The ‘inv estigation’ refused to name or
charge the oﬃcer a er what must surely be considered a murder in
the circumstances. They just li ed a carpet and sw ept. The story w as
endlessly repeated about ﬁv e people dying in the ‘armed
insurrection’ when there w as no report of rioters using w eapons.
Apart from Babbi  the other four died from a heart a ack, strokes
and apparently a drug ov erdose. Capitol police oﬃcer Brian Sicknick
w as reported to hav e died a er being bludgeoned with a ﬁre
extinguisher when he w as aliv e a er the riot w as ov er and died later
of what the W ashington Medical Examiner ’ s Oﬃce said w as a stroke.
Sicknick had no external injuries. The lies w ere deliv ered like rapid
ﬁre. There w as a narrativ e to build with incessant repetition of the lie
until the lie became the accepted ‘ev erybody knows that’ truth. The
‘Big Lie’ technique of Nazi Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels is
constantly used by the Cult which w as behind the Nazis and is
today behind the ‘Covid’ and ‘climate change’ hoaxes. Goebbels
said:
If you tell a lie big enough and keep repeating it, people will eventually come to believe it.
The lie can be maintained only for such time as the State can shield the people from the
political, economic and/or military consequences of the lie. It thus becomes vitally important
for the State to use all of its powers to repress dissent, for the truth is the mortal enemy of the
lie, and thus by extension, the truth is the greatest enemy of the State.Most protestors had a free run of the Capitol Building. This
allow ed pictures to be taken of rioters in iconic parts of the building
including the Senate chamber which could be used as propaganda
images against all Pushbackers. One Congressw oman described the
scene as ‘the w orst kind of non-security anybody could ev er
imagine’. W ell, the ﬁrst part w as true, but someone obviously did
imagine it and made sure it happened. Some photographs most
widely circulated featured people w earing QAnon symbols and now
the Psy op w ould be used to dub all QAnon follow ers with the
ubiquitous ﬁt-all label of ‘white supremacist’ and ‘insurrectionists’.
When a Muslim extremist called Noah Green drov e his car at tw o
police oﬃcers at the Capitol Building killing one in April, 2021, there
w as no such political and media hysteria. They w ere just
disappointed he w asn’ t white.
The witch-hunt
Gov ernment prosecutor Michael Sherwin, an aggressiv e, dark-ey ed,
professional Ro w eiler led the ‘inv estigation’ and to call it ov er the
top w ould be to understate reality a thousand fold. Hundreds w ere
tracked down and arrested for the crime of having the wrong
political views and people w ere jailed who had done nothing more
than w alk in the building, commi ed no violence or damage to
property , took a few pictures and le . They w ere labelled a ‘threat to
the Republic’ while Biden sat in the White House signing executiv e
orders wri en for him that w ere dismantling ‘the Republic’. Ev en
when judges ruled that a mother and son should not be in jail the
gov ernment kept them there. Some of those arrested hav e been
badly beaten by prison guards in W ashington and lawy ers for one
man said he suﬀered a fractured skull and w as made blind in one
ey e. Meanwhile a w oman is shot dead for no reason by a Capitol
P olice oﬃcer and w e are not allow ed to know who he is nev er mind
what has happened to him although that will be nothing . The Cult’ s
QAnon/T rump sting to identify and isolate Pushbackers and then
target them on the road to crushing and deleting them w as a
resounding success. Y ou w ould hav e thought the Russians hadinv aded the building at gunpoint and lined up senators for a ﬁring
squad to see the political and media reaction. Congressw oman
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is a child in a w oman’ s body , a terrible-
tw os, me, me, me, W oker narcissist of such proportions that w ords
hav e no meaning. She said she thought she w as going to die when
‘insurrectionists’ banged on her oﬃce door . It turned out she w asn’ t
ev en in the Capitol Building when the riot w as happening and the
‘banging’ w as a Capitol P olice oﬃcer . She referred to herself as a
‘surviv or ’ which is an insult to all those true surviv ors of violent and
sexual abuse while she liv es her pampered and privileged life
talking driv el for a living. Her W oke colleague and fellow mega-
narcissist Rashida Tlaib broke down describing the dev astating
eﬀect on her , too, of not being  in the building when the rioters w ere
there. Ocasio-Cortez and Tlaib are members of a fully- W oke group
of Congressw omen known as ‘The Squad’ along with Ilhan Omar
and A y anna Pressley . The Squad from what I can see can be
identiﬁed by its v ehement anti-white racism, anti-white men agenda,
and, as alw ays in these cases, the absence of brain cells on activ e
duty .
The usual suspects w ere on the riot case immediately in the form
of Democrat ultra-Zionist senators and operativ es Chuck Schumer
and Adam Schiﬀ demanding that T rump be impeached for ‘his part
in the insurrection’. The same pair of prats had led the failed
impeachment of T rump ov er the inv ented ‘Russia collusion’
nonsense which claimed Russia had helped T rump win the 2016
election. I didn’ t realise that T el A viv had been relocated just outside
Moscow . I must ﬁnd an up-to-date map. The Russia hoax w as a
Sabbatian operation to keep T rump occupied and impotent and to
stop any rapport with Russia which the Cult w ants to retain as a
perceptual enemy to be pulled out at will. Puppet Biden began
a acking Russia when he came to oﬃce as the Cult seeks more
upheav al, division and w ar across the w orld. A tw o-y ear stage show
‘Russia collusion inquiry’ headed by the not-v ery-bright former 9/11
FBI chief Robert Mueller , with support from 19 lawy ers, 40 FBI
agents plus intelligence analysts, forensic accountants and otherstaﬀ, dev oured tens of millions of dollars and found no evidence of
Russia collusion which a ten-y ear -old could hav e told them on day
one. Now the same moronic Schumer and Schiﬀ w anted a second
impeachment of T rump ov er the Capitol ‘insurrection’ (riot) which
the arrested dev elopment of Schumer called another ‘P earl Harbor ’
while others compared it with 9/11 in which 3,000 died and, in the
case of CNN, with the Rw andan genocide in the 1990s in which an
estimated 500,000 to 600,000 w ere murdered, betw een 250, 000 and
500,000 w omen w ere raped, and populations of whole towns w ere
hacked to death with machetes. T o make those comparisons purely
for Cult political reasons is bey ond insulting to those that suﬀered
and lost their liv es and conﬁrms y et again the callous inhumanity
that w e are dealing with. Schumer is a monumental idiot and so is
Schiﬀ, but they serv e the Cult agenda and do whatev er they’ re told
so they get looked a er . T alking of idiots – another inane man who
spanned the Russia and Capitol impeachment a empts w as Senator
Eric Sw alw ell who had the nerv e to accuse T rump of collusion with
the Russians while sleeping with a Chinese spy called Christine Fang
or ‘Fang Fang’ which is straight out of a Bond ﬁlm no doubt starring
Klaus Schw ab as the bloke living on a secret island and controlling
laser w eapons positioned in space and pointing at w orld capitals.
Fang Fang plays the part of Bond’ s inﬁltrator girlfriend which I’ m
sure she w ould enjoy rather more than sharing a bed with the
brainless Sw alw ell, lying back and thinking of China. The FBI
ev entually w arned Sw alw ell about Fang Fang which gav e her time
to escape back to the Chinese dictatorship. How v ery thoughtful of
them. The second T rump impeachment also failed and hardly
surprising when an impeachment is supposed to remov e a si ing
president and by the time it happened T rump w as no longer
president. These people are running y our country America, w ell,
oﬃcially anyw ay . T errifying isn’ t it?
Outcomes tell the story - always
The outcome of all this – and it’ s the outcome  on which Renegade
Minds focus, not the w ords – w as that a vicious, hysterical andobviously pre-planned assault w as launched on Pushbackers to
censor , silence and discredit them and ev en targeted their right to
earn a living. They hav e since been condemned as ‘domestic
terrorists’ that need to be treated like Al-Qaeda and Islamic State.
‘Domestic terrorists’ is a label the Cult has been trying to make stick
since the period of the Oklahoma bombing in 1995 which w as
blamed on ‘far -right domestic terrorists’. If y ou read The Trigger  y ou
will see that the bombing w as clearly a Problem-Reaction-Solution
carried out by the Deep State during a Bill Clinton administration so
corrupt that no dictionary deﬁnition of the term w ould ev en nearly
suﬃce. Nearly 30, 000 troops w ere deploy ed from all ov er America
to the empty streets of W ashington for Biden’ s inauguration. T en
thousand of them stay ed on with the pretext of protecting the capital
from insurrectionists when it w as more psychological programming
to normalise the use of the military in domestic law enforcement in
support of the Cult plan for a police-military state. Biden’ s fascist
administration began a purge of ‘wrong-thinkers’ in the military
which means any one that is not on board with W oke. The Capitol
Building w as surrounded by a fence with razor wire and the Land of
the Free w as further symbolically and literally dismantled. The circle
w as completed with the installation of Biden and the exploitation of
the QAnon Psy op.
America had nev er been so divided since the civil w ar of the 19th
century , Pushbackers w ere isolated and dubbed terrorists and now ,
as w as alw ays going to happen, the Cult immediately set about
deleting what li le w as le  of freedom and transforming American
society through a swish of the hand of the most controlled
‘president’ in American history leading (oﬃcially at least) the most
extreme regime since the country w as declared an independent state
on July 4th, 1776. Biden issued undebated, dictatorial executiv e
orders almost by the hour in his opening days in oﬃce across the
whole spectrum of the Cult wish-list including diluting controls on
the border with Mexico allowing thousands of migrants to illegally
enter the United States to transform the demographics of America
and import an election-changing number of perceiv ed Democratv oters. Then there w ere Biden deportation amnesties for the already
illegally resident (estimated to be as high as 20 or ev en 30 million). A
bill before Congress aw arded American citizenship to any one who
could prov e they had w orked in agriculture for just 180 days in the
previous tw o y ears as ‘Big Ag’ secured its slav e labour long-term.
There w ere the plans to add new states to the union such as Puerto
Rico and making W ashington DC a state. They are all parts of a plan
to ensure that the Cult-owned W oke Democrats w ould be
permanently in pow er .
Border – what border?
I hav e exposed in detail in other books how mass immigration into
the United States and Europe is the w ork of Cult netw orks fuelled by
the tens of billions spent to this and other ends by George Soros and
his global Open Society (open borders) Foundations. The impact can
be seen in America alone where the population has increased by 100
million  in li le more than 30 y ears mostly through immigration. I
wrote in The Answer  that the plan w as to hav e so many people
crossing the southern border that the numbers become unstoppable
and w e are now there under Cult-owned Biden. El Salv ador in
Central America puts the scale of what is happening into context. A
third of the population now liv es in the United States, much of it
illegally , and many more are on the w ay . The methodology is to
crush Central and South American countries economically and
spread violence through machete-wielding psychopathic gangs like
MS-13 based in El Salv ador and now operating in many American
cities. Biden-imposed lax security at the southern border means that
it is all but open. He said before his ‘election’ that he w anted to see a
surge tow ards the border if he became president and that w as the
green light for people to do just that a er election day to create the
human disaster that follow ed for both America and the migrants.
When that surge came the imbecilic Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said it
w asn’ t a ‘surge’ because they are ‘children, not insurgents’ and the
term ‘surge’ (used by Biden) w as a claim of ‘white supremacists’.This disingenuous lady may one day enter the realm of the most
basic intelligence, but it w on’ t be any time soon.
Sabbatians and the Cult are in the process of destroying America
by importing violent people and gangs in among the genuine to
terrorise American cities and by ov erwhelming services that cannot
cope with the sheer v olume of new arriv als. Something similar is
happening in Europe as W estern society in general is targeted for
demographic and cultural transformation and upheav al. The plan
demands violence and crime to create an environment of
intimidation, fear and division and Soros has been funding the
election of district a orneys across America who then stop
prosecuting many crimes, reduce sentences for violent crimes and
free as many violent criminals as they can. Sabbatians are creating
the chaos from which order – their order – can respond in a classic
Problem-Reaction-Solution. A Freemasonic moto says ‘Ordo Ab
Chao’ (Order out of Chaos) and this is why the Cult is constantly
creating chaos to impose a new ‘order ’. Here y ou hav e the reason
the Cult is constantly creating chaos. The ‘Covid’ hoax can be seen
with those entering the United States by plane being forced to take a
‘Covid’ test while migrants ﬂooding through southern border
processing facilities do not. Nothing is put in the w ay of mass
migration and if that means ignoring the gov ernment’ s own ‘Covid’
rules then so be it. They know it’ s all bullshit anyw ay . Any pushback
on this is denounced as ‘racist’ by W okers and Sabbatian fronts like
the ultra-Zionist Anti-Defamation League headed by the appalling
Jonathan Greenbla  which at the same time argues that Israel should
not giv e citizenship and v oting rights to more P alestinian Arabs or
the ‘Jewish population’ (in truth the Sabbatian netw ork) will lose
control of the country .
Society-changing numbers
Biden’ s masters hav e declared that countries like El Salv ador are so
dangerous that their people must be allow ed into the United States
for humanitarian reasons when there are few er murders in large
parts of many Central American countries than in US cities likeBaltimore. That is not to say Central America cannot be a dangerous
place and Cult-controlled American gov ernments hav e been making
it so since w ay back, along with the dismantling of economies, in a
long-term plan to driv e people north into the United States. P arts of
Central America are v ery dangerous, but in other areas the story is
being greatly exaggerated to justify relaxing immigration criteria.
Migrants are being oﬀered free healthcare and education in the
United States as another incentiv e to head for the border and there is
no requirement to be ﬁnancially independent before y ou can enter to
prev ent the resources of America being drained. Y ou can’ t blame
migrants for seeking what they believ e will be a be er life, but they
are being play ed by the Cult for dark and nefarious ends. The
numbers since Biden took oﬃce are huge. In February , 2021, more
than 100,000 people w ere known to hav e tried to enter the US
illegally through the southern border (it w as 34,000 in the same
month in 2020) and in March it w as 170,000 – a 418 percent increase
on March, 2020. These numbers are only known people, not the ones
who get in unseen. The true ﬁgure for migrants illegally crossing the
border in a single month w as estimated by one congressman at
250,000 and that number will only rise under Biden’ s current policy .
Gangs of murdering drug-running thugs that control the Mexican
side of the border demand money – thousands of dollars – to let
migrants cross the Rio Grande into America. At the same time gun
ba les are breaking out on the border sev eral times a w eek betw een
riv al Mexican drug gangs (which now operate globally) who are
equipped with sophisticated military-grade w eapons, grenades and
armoured v ehicles. While the Capitol Building w as being ‘protected’
from a non-existent ‘threat’ by thousands of troops, and others w ere
still deploy ed at the time in the Cult Neocon w ar in Afghanistan, the
southern border of America w as le  to its fate. This is not
incompetence, it is cold calculation.
By March, 2021, there w ere 17,000 unaccompanied children held at
border facilities and many of them are ensnared by people traﬃckers
for paedophile rings and raped on their journey north to America.
This is not conjecture – this is fact. Many of those designatedchildren are in reality teenage boys or older . Meanwhile W okers
posture their self-purity for encouraging poor and tragic people to
come to America and face this nightmare both on the journey and at
the border with the disgusting ﬁgure of House Speaker Nancy P elosi
giving disingenuous speeches about caring for migrants. The
w oman’ s evil. W okers condemned T rump for having children in
cages at the border (so did Obama, Shhhh ), but now they are sleeping
on the ﬂoor without access to a show er with one border facility 729
percent ov er capacity . The Biden insanity ev en proposed ﬂying
migrants from the southern border to the northern border with
Canada for ‘processing’. The whole shambles is being ov erseen by
ultra-Zionist Secretary of Homeland Security , the moronic liar
Alejandro May orkas, who banned news cameras at border facilities
to stop Americans seeing what w as happening. May orkas said there
w as not a ban on news crews; it w as just that they w ere not allow ed
to ﬁlm. Alongside him at Homeland Security is another ultra-Zionist
Cass Sunstein appointed by Biden to ov ersee new immigration laws.
Sunstein despises conspiracy researchers to the point where he
suggests they should be banned or taxed  for having such views. The
man is not bonkers or anything. He’ s perfectly w ell-adjusted, but
adjusted to what is the question. Criticise what is happening and
y ou are a ‘white supremacist’ when earlier non-white immigrants
also oppose the numbers which eﬀect their liv es and opportunities.
Black people in poor areas are particularly damaged by uncontrolled
immigration and the increased competition for w ork opportunities
with those who will w ork for less. They are also losing v oting pow er
as Hispanics become more dominant in former black areas. It’ s a
downw ard spiral for them while the billionaires behind the policy
drone on about how much they care about black people and
‘racism’. None of this is about compassion for migrants or black
people – that’ s just wind and air . Migrants are instead being
mercilessly exploited to transform America while the countries they
leav e are losing their future and the same is true in Europe. Mass
immigration may now be the w ork of W oke Democrats, but it can be
traced back to the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act (itw asn’ t) signed into law by Republican hero President Ronald
Reagan which gav e amnesty to millions living in the United States
illegally and other incentiv es for people to head for the southern
border . Here w e hav e the one-party state at w ork again.
Save me syndrome
Almost ev ery aspect of what I hav e been exposing as the Cult
agenda w as on display in ev en the ﬁrst days of ‘Biden’ with silencing
of Pushbackers at the forefront of ev erything. A Renegade Mind will
view the T rump y ears and QAnon in a v ery diﬀerent light to their
supporters and adv ocates as the dots are connected. The
QAnon/T rump Psy op has giv en the Cult all it w as looking for . W e
may not know how much, or li le, that T rump realised he w as being
used, but that’ s a side issue. This pincer mov ement produced the
desired outcome of dividing America and having Pushbackers
isolated. T o turn this around w e hav e to look at new routes to
empow erment which do not include handing our pow er to other
people and groups through what I will call the ‘Sav e Me Syndrome’
– ‘I w ant someone else to do it so that I don’ t hav e to’. W e hav e seen
this at w ork throughout human history and the QAnon/T rump
Psy op is only the latest incarnation alongside all the others. Religion
is an obvious expression of this when people look to a ‘god’ or priest
to sav e them or tell them how to be sav ed and then there are ‘sav e
me’ politicians like T rump. P olitics is a div ersion and not a ‘saviour ’.
It is a means to block positiv e change, not make it possible.
Sav e Me Syndrome alw ays comes with the same repeating theme
of handing y our pow er to whom or what y ou believ e will sav e y ou
while y our real ‘saviour ’ stares back from the mirror ev ery morning.
Renegade Minds are constantly vigilant in this regard and alw ays
asking the question ‘What can I do?’ rather than ‘What can someone
else do for me?’ Gandhi w as right when he said: ‘Y ou must be the
change y ou w ant to see in the w orld.’ W e are indeed the people w e
hav e been w aiting for . W e are presented with a constant ra  of
reasons to concede that pow er to others and forget where the real
pow er is. Humanity has the numbers and the Cult does not. It has touse div ersion and division to target the unstoppable pow er that
comes from unity . Religions, gov ernments, politicians, corporations,
media, QAnon, are all diﬀerent manifestations of this pow er -
div ersion and dilution. Refusing to giv e y our pow er to gov ernments
and instead handing it to T rump and QAnon is not to take a new
direction, but merely to recycle the old one with new names on the
posters. I will explore this phenomenon as w e proceed and how to
break the cycles and recycles that got us here through the mists of
repeating perception and so repeating history .
For now w e shall turn to the most potent example in the entire
human story of the consequences that follow when y ou giv e y our
pow er aw ay . I am talking, of course, of the ‘Covid’ hoax.WCHAPTER FOUR
‘Covid’: Calculated catastrophe
Facts are threatening to those invested in fraud
DaShanne Stokes
e can easily unrav el the real reason for the ‘Covid pandemic’
hoax by employing the Renegade Mind methodology that I
hav e outlined this far . W e’ll start by comparing the long-planned
Cult outcome with the ‘Covid pandemic’ outcome. Know the
outcome and y ou’ll see the journey .
I hav e highlighted the plan for the Hunger Games Society which
has been in my books for so many y ears with the v ery few
controlling the v ery many through ongoing dependency . T o create
this dependency it is essential to destroy independent liv elihoods,
businesses and employment to make the population reliant on the
state (the Cult) for ev en the basics of life through a guaranteed
pi ance income. While independence of income remained these Cult
ambitions w ould be thw arted. W ith this knowledge it w as easy to
see where the ‘pandemic’ hoax w as going once talk of ‘lockdowns’
began and the closing of all but perceiv ed ‘essential’ businesses to
‘sav e’ us from an alleged ‘deadly virus’. Cult corporations like
Amazon and W almart w ere naturally considered ‘essential’ while
mom and pop shops and stores had their doors closed by fascist
decree. As a result with ev ery new lockdown and new regulation
more small and medium, ev en large businesses not owned by the
Cult, w ent to the w all while Cult giants and their frontmen and
w omen grew ﬁnancially fa er by the second. Mom and pop w eredenied an income and the right to earn a living and the w ealth of
people like Jeﬀ Bezos (Amazon), Mark Zuckerberg (Facebook) and
Sergei Brin and Larry P age (Google/Alphabet) hav e reached record
lev els. The Cult w as increasing its own pow er through further
dramatic concentrations of w ealth while the competition w as being
destroy ed and brought into a state of dependency . Lockdowns hav e
been instigated to secure that v ery end and w ere nev er anything to
do with health. My brother P aul spent 45 y ears building up a bus
repair business, but lockdowns meant buses w ere running at a
fraction of normal lev els for months on end. Similar stories can told
in their hundreds of millions w orldwide. Eﬀorts of a lifetime coldly
destroy ed by Cult multi-billionaires and their lackeys in gov ernment
and law enforcement who continued to earn their living from the
taxation of the people while denying the right of the same people to
earn theirs. How diﬀerent it w ould hav e been if those making and
enforcing these decisions had to face the same ﬁnancial hardships of
those they aﬀected, but they nev er do.
Gates of Hell
Behind it all in the full knowledge of what he is doing and why is
the psychopathic ﬁgure of Cult operativ e Bill Gates. His puppet
T edros at the W orld Health Organization declared ‘Covid’ a
pandemic in March, 2020. The WHO had changed the deﬁnition of a
‘pandemic’ in 2009 just a month before declaring the ‘swine ﬂu
pandemic’ which w ould not hav e been so under the previous
deﬁnition. The same applies to ‘Covid’. The deﬁnition had
included… ‘an infection by an infectious agent, occurring
simultaneously in diﬀerent countries, with a signiﬁcant mortality
rate relativ e to the proportion of the population infected’. The new
deﬁnition remov ed the need for ‘signiﬁcant mortality’. The
‘pandemic’ has been fraudulent ev en down to the deﬁnition, but
Gates demanded economy-destroying lockdowns, school closures,
social distancing, mandatory masks, a ‘v accination’ for ev ery man,
w oman and child on the planet and sev ere consequences and
restrictions for those that refused. Who gav e him this pow er? TheCult did which he serv es like a li le boy in short trousers doing
what his daddy tells him. He and his psychopathic missus ev en
smiled when they said that much w orse w as to come (what they
knew w as planned to come). Gates responded in the ma er -of-fact
w ay of all psychopaths to a question about the eﬀect on the w orld
economy of what he w as doing:
Well, it won’t go to zero but it will shrink. Global GDP is probably going to take the biggest
hit ever [Gates was smiling as he said this] … in my lifetime this will be the greatest economic
hit. But you don’t have a choice. People act as if you have a choice. People don’t feel like
going to the stadium when they might get infected … People are deeply affected by seeing
these stats, by knowing they could be part of the transmission chain, old people, their parents
and grandparents, could be affected by this, and so you don’t get to say ignore what is going
on here.
There will be the ability to open up, particularly in rich countries, if things are done well over
the next few months, but for the world at large normalcy only returns when we have largely
vaccinated the entire population.
The man has no compassion or empathy . How could he when he’ s
a psychopath like all Cult play ers? My own view is that ev en bey ond
that he is v ery seriously mentally ill. Look in his ey es and y ou can
see this along with his crazy ﬂailing arms. Y ou don’ t do what he has
done to the w orld population since the start of 2020 unless y ou are
mentally ill and at the most extreme end of psychopathic. Y ou
especially don’ t do it when to y ou know , as w e shall see, that cases
and deaths from ‘Covid’ are fakery and a product of monumental
ﬁgure massaging. ‘These stats’ that Gates referred to are based on a
‘test’ that’ s not testing for the ‘virus’ as he has known all along. He
made his fortune with big Cult support as an infamously ruthless
so w are salesman and now buys global control of ‘health’ (death)
policy without the population he aﬀects having any say . It’ s a
breathtaking outrage. Gates talked about people being deeply
aﬀected by fear of ‘Covid’ when that w as because of him  and his
global netw ork lying to them minute-by-minute supported by a
lying media that he seriously inﬂuences and funds to the tune of
hundreds of millions. He’ s handed big sums to media operations
including the BBC, NBC, Al Jazeera, Univision, PBS NewsHour,ProPublica, National Journal, The Guardian, The Financial Times, The
Atlantic, Texas Tribune, USA Today  publisher Ganne , Washington
Monthly, Le Monde,  Center for Inv estigativ e Reporting, Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting, National Press Foundation, International
Center for Journalists, Solutions Journalism Netw ork, the P oynter
Institute for Media Studies, and many more. Gates is ev erywhere in
the ‘Covid’ hoax and the man must go to prison – or a mental facility
– for the rest of his life and his money distributed to those he has
taken such enormous psychopathic pleasure in crushing.
The Muscle
The Hunger Games global structure demands a police-military state
– a fusion of the tw o into one force – which viciously imposes the
will of the Cult on the population and protects the Cult from public
rebellion. In that regard, too, the ‘Covid’ hoax just keeps on giving.
O en unlawful, ridiculous and contradictory ‘Covid’ rules and
regulations hav e been policed across the w orld by moronic
automatons and psychopaths made faceless by face-nappy masks
and acting like the Nazi SS and fascist blackshirts and brownshirts of
Hitler and Mussolini. The smallest departure from the rules decreed
by the psychos in gov ernment and their clueless gofers w ere jumped
upon by the face-nappy fascists. Brutality against public protestors
soon became commonplace ev en on girls, w omen and old people as
the brav e men with the batons – the Face-Nappies as I call them –
broke up peaceful protests and handed out ﬁnes like confe i to
people who couldn’ t earn a living let alone pay hundreds of pounds
for what w as once an accepted human right. Robot Face-Nappies of
No ingham police in the English East Midlands ﬁned one group
£11,000 for a ending a child’ s birthday party . For decades I charted
the transformation of law enforcement as genuine, decent oﬃcers
w ere replaced with psychopaths and the brain dead who w ould
happily and brutally do whatev er their masters told them. Now they
w ere let loose on the public and I w ould emphasise the point that
none of this just happened. The step-by-step change in the dynamic
betw een police and public w as orchestrated from the shadows bythose who knew where this w as all going and the same with the
perceptual reframing of those in all lev els of authority and oﬃcial
administration through ‘training courses’ by organisations such as
Common Purpose which w as created in the late 1980s and giv en a
massiv e boost in Blair era Britain until it became a global
phenomenon. Supposed public ‘serv ants’ began to view the
population as the enemy and the same w as true of the police. This
w as the start of the explosion of behaviour manipulation
organisations and netw orks preparing for the all-w ar on the human
psyche unleashed with the dawn of 2020. I will go into more detail
about this later in the book because it is a core part of what is
happening.
P olice desecrated beauty spots to deter people gathering and
arrested w omen for w alking in the countryside alone ‘too far ’ from
their homes. W e had arrogant, clueless sergeants in the Isle of W ight
police where I liv e posting on Facebook what they insisted the
population must do or else. A schoolmaster sergeant called Radford
looked y oung enough for me to ask if his mother knew he w as out,
but he w as posting what he expected  people to do while a Sergeant
W ilkinson boasted about ﬁning lads for meeting in a McDonald’ s car
park where they w ent to get a lockdown takeaw ay . W ilkinson added
that he had ev en cancelled their order . What a pair of prats these
people are and y et they hav e increasingly become the norm among
Jackboot Johnson’ s Y ellowshirts once known as the British police.
This w as the theme all ov er the w orld with police sav agery common
during lockdown protests in the United States, the Netherlands, and
the fascist state of V ictoria in Australia under its tyrannical and
again moronic premier Daniel Andrews. Amazing how tyrannical
and moronic tend to w ork as a team and the same combination
could be seen across America as arrogant, narcissistic W oke
gov ernors and may ors such as Gavin Newsom (California), Andrew
Cuomo (New Y ork), Gretchen Whitmer (Michigan), Lori Lightfoot
(Chicago) and Eric Garce i (Los Angeles) did their Nazi and Stalin
impressions with the full support of the compliant brutality of their
enforcers in uniform as they arrested small business owners defyingfascist shutdown orders and took them to jail in ankle shackles and
handcuﬀs. This happened to bistro owner Marlena P avlos-Hackney
in Gretchen Whitmer ’ s fascist state of Michigan when police arriv ed
to enforce an order by a state-owned judge for ‘pu ing the
community at risk’ at a time when other states like T exas w ere
dropping restrictions and migrants w ere pouring across the
southern border without any ‘Covid’ questions at all. I’ m sure there
are many oﬃcers appalled by what they are ordered to do, but not
nearly enough of them. If they w ere truly appalled they w ould not
do it. As the months passed ev ery opportunity w as taken to hav e the
military inv olv ed to make their presence on the streets ev er more
familiar and ‘normal’ for the longer -term goal of police-military
fusion.
Another crucial element to the Hunger Games enforcement
netw ork has been encouraging the public to report neighbours and
others for ‘breaking the lockdown rules’. The group faced with
£11,000 in ﬁnes at the child’ s birthday party w ould hav e been
dobbed-in by a neighbour with a brain the size of a pea. The
technique w as most famously employ ed by the Stasi secret police in
communist East Germany who had public informants placed
throughout the population. A police chief in the UK says his force
doesn’ t need to carry out ‘Covid’ patrols when they are ﬂooded with
so many calls from the public reporting other people for visiting the
beach. Dorset police chief James V aughan said people w ere so
enthusiastic about snitching on their fellow humans they w ere now
operating as an auxiliary arm of the police: ‘W e are still ge ing
around 400 reports a w eek from the public, so w e will respond to
reports …W e w on’ t need to be doing hotspot patrols because people
are v ery quick to pick the phone up and tell us.’ V aughan didn’ t say
that this is a pillar of all tyrannies of whatev er complexion and the
means to hugely extend the reach of enforcement while spreading
distrust among the people and making them w ary of doing anything
that might get them reported. Those narcissistic Isle of W ight
sergeants Radford and W ilkinson nev er fail to add a link to their
Facebook posts where the public can inform on their fellow slav es.Neither w ould be self-aw are enough to realise they w ere imitating
the Stasi which they might w ell nev er hav e heard of. Gov ernment
psychologists that I will expose later laid out a policy to turn
communities against each other in the same w ay .
A coincidence? Yep, and I can knit fog
I knew from the start of the alleged pandemic that this w as a Cult
operation. It presented limitless potential to rapidly adv ance the Cult
agenda and exploit manipulated fear to demand that ev ery man,
w oman and child on the planet w as ‘v accinated’ in a process nev er
used on humans before which infuses self-replicating synthetic
material into human cells. Remember the plan to transform the
human body from a biological to a synthetic biological state. I’ll deal
with the ‘v accine’ (that’ s not actually a v accine) when I focus on the
genetic agenda. Enough to say here that mass global ‘v accination’
justiﬁed by this ‘new virus’ set alarms ringing a er 30 y ears of
tracking these people and their methods. The ‘Covid’ hoax oﬃcially
beginning in China w as also a big red ﬂag for reasons I will be
explaining. The agenda potential w as so enormous that I could
dismiss any idea that the ‘virus’ appeared naturally . Major
happenings with major agenda implications nev er occur without
Cult inv olv ement in making them happen. My questions w ere
tw ofold in early 2020 as the media began its campaign to induce
global fear and hysteria: W as this alleged infectious agent released
on purpose by the Cult or did it ev en exist at all? I then did what I
alw ays do in these situations. I sat, observ ed and w aited to see
where the evidence and information w ould take me. By March and
early April synchronicity w as strongly – and ev er more so since then
– pointing me in the direction of there is no ‘virus’ . I w ent public on
that with derision ev en from sw athes of the alternativ e media that
v oiced a scenario that the Chinese gov ernment released the ‘virus’ in
league with Deep State elements in the United States from a top-
lev el bio-lab in W uhan where the ‘virus’ is said to hav e ﬁrst
appeared. I looked at that possibility , but I didn’ t buy it for sev eral
reasons. Deaths from the ‘virus’ did not in any w ay match what theyw ould hav e been with a ‘deadly biow eapon’ and it is much more
eﬀectiv e if y ou sell the illusion  of an infectious agent rather than
having a real one unless y ou can control through injection who has it
and who doesn’ t. Otherwise y ou lose control of ev ents. A made-up
‘virus’ giv es y ou a blank sheet of paper on which y ou can make it do
whatev er y ou like and hav e any symptoms or mutant ‘v ariants’ y ou
choose to add while a real infectious agent w ould limit y ou to what
it actually does. A phantom disease allows y ou to hav e endless
ludicrous ‘studies’ on the ‘Covid’ dollar to widen the perceiv ed
impact by inv enting ev er more ‘at risk’ groups including one study
which said those who w alk slowly may be almost four times more
likely to die from the ‘virus’. P eople are in psychiatric w ards for less.
A real ‘deadly biow eapon’ can take out people in the hierarchy
that are not part of the Cult, but essential to its operation. Obviously
they don’ t w ant that. Releasing a real disease means y ou
immediately lose control of it. Releasing an illusory one means y ou
don’ t. Again it’ s vital that people are extra careful when dealing with
what they w ant to hear . A biow eapon unleashed from a Chinese
laboratory in collusion with the American Deep State may ﬁt a
conspiracy narrativ e, but is it true? W ould it not be far more eﬀectiv e
to use the excuse of a ‘virus’ to justify the real biow eapon – the
‘v accine’? That w ay y our disease agent does not hav e to be
transmi ed and arriv es directly through a syringe. I saw a French
virologist Luc Montagnier quoted in the alternativ e media as saying
he had discov ered that the alleged ‘new’ sev ere acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus , or SARS-CoV -2, w as made artiﬁcially and
included elements of the human immunodeﬁciency ‘virus’ (HIV)
and a parasite that causes malaria. SARS-CoV -2 is alleged to trigger
an alleged illness called Covid-19. I remembered Montagnier ’ s name
from my research y ears before into claims that an HIV ‘retrovirus’
causes AIDs – claims that w ere demolished by Berkeley virologist
P eter Duesberg who show ed that no one had ev er prov ed that HIV
causes acquired immunodeﬁciency syndrome or AIDS. Claims that
become accepted as fact, publicly and medically , with no proof
whatsoev er are an ev er -recurring story that profoundly applies to‘Covid’. Nev ertheless, despite the lack of proof, Montagnier ’ s team
at the P asteur Institute in P aris had a long dispute with American
researcher Robert Gallo ov er which of them discov ered and isolated
the HIV ‘virus’ and with no evidence  found it to cause AIDS. Y ou will
see later that there is also no evidence that any ‘virus’ causes any
disease or that there is ev en such a thing as a ‘virus’ in the w ay it is
said to exist. The claim to hav e ‘isolated’ the HIV ‘virus’ will be
presented in its real context as w e come to the shocking story – and
it is a story – of SARS-CoV -2 and so will Montagnier ’ s assertion that
he identiﬁed the full SARS-CoV -2 genome.
Hoax in the making
W e can pick up the ‘Covid’ story in 2010 and the publication by the
Rockefeller Foundation of a document called ‘Scenarios for the
Future of T echnology and International Dev elopment’. The inner
circle of the Rockefeller family has been serving the Cult since John
D. Rockefeller (1839-1937) made his fortune with Standard Oil. It is
less w ell known that the same Rockefeller – the Bill Gates of his day
– w as responsible for establishing what is now referred to as ‘Big
Pharma’, the global netw ork of pharmaceutical companies that make
outrageous proﬁts dispensing scalpel and drug ‘medicine’ and are
obsessed with pumping v accines in ev er -increasing number into as
many human arms and backsides as possible. John D. Rockefeller
w as the driving force behind the creation of the ‘education’ system
in the United States and elsewhere speciﬁcally designed to program
the perceptions of generations therea er . The Rockefeller family
donated exceptionally v aluable land in New Y ork for the United
Nations building and w ere central in establishing the W orld Health
Organization in 1948 as an agency of the UN which w as created
from the start as a T rojan horse and stalking horse for w orld
gov ernment. Now enter Bill Gates. His family and the Rockefellers
hav e long been extremely close and I hav e seen genealogy which
claims that if y ou go back far enough the tw o families fuse into the
same bloodline. Gates has said that the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation w as inspired by the Rockefeller Foundation and why notwhen both are serving the same Cult? Major tax-exempt foundations
are ov erwhelmingly criminal enterprises in which Cult assets fund
the Cult agenda in the guise of ‘philanthropy’ while av oiding tax in
the process. Cult operativ es can become mega-rich in their role of
front men and w omen for the psychopaths at the inner core and
they , too, hav e to be psychopaths to knowingly serv e such evil. P art
of the deal is that a big percentage of the w ealth gleaned from
representing the Cult has to be spent adv ancing the ambitions of the
Cult and hence y ou hav e the Rockefeller Foundation, Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation (and so  many more) and people like
George Soros with his global Open Society Foundations spending
their billions in pursuit of global Cult control. Gates is a global
public face of the Cult with his interv entions in w orld aﬀairs
including Big T ech inﬂuence; a central role in the ‘Covid’ and
‘v accine’ scam; promotion of the climate change shakedown;
manipulation of education; geoengineering of the skies; and his
food-control agenda as the biggest owner of farmland in America,
his GMO promotion and through other means. As one writer said:
‘Gates monopolizes or wields disproportionate inﬂuence ov er the
tech industry , global health and v accines, agriculture and food policy
(including biopiracy and fake food), w eather modiﬁcation and other
climate technologies, surv eillance, education and media.’ The almost
limitless w ealth secured through Microso  and other not-allow ed-
to-fail v entures (including v accines) has been ploughed into a long,
long list of Cult projects designed to enslav e the entire human race.
Gates and the Rockefellers hav e been w orking as one unit with the
Rockefeller -established W orld Health Organization leading global
‘Covid’ policy controlled by Gates through his mouth-piece T edros.
Gates became the WHO’ s biggest funder when T rump announced
that the American gov ernment w ould cease its donations, but Biden
immediately said he w ould restore the money when he took oﬃce in
January , 2021. The Gates Foundation (the Cult) owns through
limitless funding the w orld health system and the major play ers
across the globe in the ‘Covid’ hoax.Okay , with that background w e return to that Rockefeller
Foundation document of 2010 headed ‘Scenarios for the Future of
T echnology and International Dev elopment’ and its ‘imaginary’
epidemic of a virulent and deadly inﬂuenza strain which infected 20
percent of the global population and killed eight million in sev en
months. The Rockefeller scenario w as that the epidemic destroy ed
economies, closed shops, oﬃces and other businesses and led to
gov ernments imposing ﬁerce rules and restrictions that included
mandatory w earing of face masks and body-temperature checks to
enter communal spaces like railw ay stations and supermarkets. The
document predicted that ev en a er the height of the Rockefeller -
envisaged epidemic the authoritarian rule w ould continue to deal
with further pandemics, transnational terrorism, environmental
crises and rising pov erty . Now y ou may think that the Rockefellers
are our modern-day seers or alternativ ely , and rather more likely ,
that they w ell knew what w as planned a few y ears further on.
Fascism had to be imposed, y ou see, to ‘protect citizens from risk
and exposure’. The Rockefeller scenario document said:
During the pandemic, national leaders around the world flexed their authority and imposed
airtight rules and restrictions, from the mandatory wearing of face masks to body-temperature
checks at the entries to communal spaces like train stations and supermarkets. Even after the
pandemic faded, this more authoritarian control and oversight of citizens and their activities
stuck and even intensified. In order to protect themselves from the spread of increasingly
global problems – from pandemics and transnational terrorism to environmental crises and
rising poverty – leaders around the world took a firmer grip on power.
At first, the notion of a more controlled world gained wide acceptance and approval. Citizens
willingly gave up some of their sovereignty – and their privacy – to more paternalistic states in
exchange for greater safety and stability. Citizens were more tolerant, and even eager, for top-
down direction and oversight, and national leaders had more latitude to impose order in the
ways they saw fit.
In developed countries, this heightened oversight took many forms: biometric IDs for all
citizens, for example, and tighter regulation of key industries whose stability was deemed vital
to national interests. In many developed countries, enforced cooperation with a suite of new
regulations and agreements slowly but steadily restored both order and, importantly,
economic growth.There w e hav e the prophetic Rockefellers in 2010 and three y ears
later came their paper for the Global Health Summit in Beĳing,
China, when gov ernment representativ es, the priv ate sector ,
international organisations and groups met to discuss the next 100
y ears of ‘global health’. The Rockefeller Foundation-funded paper
w as called ‘Dreaming the Future of Health for the Next 100 Y ears
and more prophecy ensued as it described a dystopian future: ‘The
abundance of data, digitally tracking and linking people may mean
the ‘death of priv acy’ and may replace physical interaction with
transient, virtual connection, generating isolation and raising
questions of how v alues are shaped in virtual netw orks.’ Next in the
‘Covid’ hoax preparation sequence came a ‘table top’ simulation in
2018 for another ‘imaginary’ pandemic of a disease called Clade X
which w as said to kill 900 million people. The exercise w as
organised by the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins Univ ersity’ s Center
for Health Security in the United States and this is the v ery same
univ ersity that has been compiling the disgustingly and
systematically erroneous global ﬁgures for ‘Covid’ cases and deaths.
Similar Johns Hopkins health crisis scenarios hav e included the Dark
W inter exercise in 2001 and Atlantic Storm in 2005.
Nostradamus 201
For sheer predictiv e genius look no further prophecy-w atchers than
the Bill Gates-funded Ev ent 201 held only six w eeks before the
‘coronavirus pandemic’ is supposed to hav e broken out in China
and Ev ent 201 w as based on a scenario of a global ‘coronavirus
pandemic’. Melinda Gates, the great man’ s missus, told the BBC that
he had ‘prepared for y ears’ for a coronavirus pandemic which told
us what w e already knew . Nostradamugates had predicted in a TED
talk in 2015 that a pandemic w as coming that w ould kill a lot of
people and demolish the w orld economy . My god, the man is a
machine – possibly ev en literally . Now here he w as only w eeks
before the real thing funding just such a simulated scenario and
inv olving his friends and associates at Johns Hopkins, the W orld
Economic Forum Cult-front of Klaus Schw ab, the United Nations,Johnson & Johnson, major banks, and oﬃcials from China and the
Centers for Disease Control in the United States. What synchronicity
– Johns Hopkins w ould go on to compile the fraudulent ‘Covid’
ﬁgures, the W orld Economic Forum and Schw ab w ould push the
‘Great Reset’ in response to ‘Covid’, the Centers for Disease Control
w ould be at the forefront of ‘Covid’ policy in the United States,
Johnson & Johnson w ould produce a ‘Covid v accine’, and
ev erything w ould oﬃcially start just w eeks later in China. Spooky ,
eh? They w ere ev en accurate in creating a simulation of a ‘virus’
pandemic because the ‘real thing’ w ould also be a simulation. Ev ent
201 w as not an exercise preparing for something that might happen;
it w as a rehearsal for what those in control knew w as going  to
happen and v ery shortly . Hours of this simulation w ere posted on
the Internet and the v arious themes and responses mirrored what
w ould soon be imposed to transform human society . News stories
w ere inserted and what they said w ould be commonplace a few
w eeks later with still more prophecy perfection. Much discussion
focused on the need to deal with misinformation and the ‘anti-v ax
mov ement’ which is exactly what happened when the ‘virus’ arriv ed
– w as said to hav e arriv ed – in the W est.
Cult-owned social media banned criticism and exposure of the
oﬃcial ‘virus’ narrativ e and when I said there was  no ‘virus’ in early
April, 2020, I w as banned by one platform a er another including
Y ouT ube, Facebook and later T wi er . The mainstream broadcast
media in Britain w as in eﬀect banned from interviewing me by the
T ony-Blair -created gov ernment broadcasting censor Ofcom headed
by career gov ernment bureaucrat Melanie Daw es who w as
appointed just as the ‘virus’ hoax w as about to play out in January ,
2020. At the same time the Ickonic media platform w as using V imeo,
another ultra-Zionist-owned operation, while our own play er w as
being created and they deleted in an instant hundreds of videos,
documentaries, series and shows to conﬁrm their unbeliev able
vindictiv eness. W e had copies, of course, and they had to be restored
one by one when our play er w as ready . These people hav e no class.
Sabbatian Facebook promised free adv ertisements for the Gates-controlled W orld Health Organization narrativ e while deleting ‘false
claims and conspiracy theories’ to stop ‘misinformation’ about the
alleged coronavirus. All these responses could be seen just a short
while earlier in the scenarios of Ev ent 201. Extreme censorship w as
absolutely crucial for the Cult because the oﬃcial story w as so
ridiculous and unsupportable by the evidence that it could nev er
surviv e open debate and the free-ﬂow of information and opinion. If
y ou can’ t win a debate then don’ t hav e one is the Cult’ s approach
throughout history . Facebook’ s li le boy front man – front boy –
Mark Zuckerberg equated ‘credible and accurate information’ with
oﬃcial sources and exposing their lies with ‘misinformation’.
Silencing those that can see
The censorship dynamic of Ev ent 201 is now the norm with an army
of narrativ e-supporting ‘fact-checker ’ organisations whose entire
reason for being is to tell the public that oﬃcial narrativ es are true
and those exposing them are lying. One of the most appalling of
these ‘fact-checkers’ is called NewsGuard founded by ultra-Zionist
Americans Gordon Crovitz and Stev en Brill. Crovitz is a former
publisher of The Wall Street Journal , former Executiv e V ice President
of Dow Jones, a member of the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR),
and on the board of the American Association of Rhodes Scholars.
The CFR and Rhodes Scholarships, named a er Rothschild agent
Cecil Rhodes who plundered the gold and diamonds of South Africa
for his masters and the Cult, hav e featured widely in my books.
NewsGuard don’ t seem to like me for some reason – I really can’ t
think why – and they hav e done all they can to hav e me censored
and discredited which is, to quote an old British politician, like being
sav aged by a dead sheep. They are, how ev er , like all in the
censorship netw ork, v ery w ell connected and funded by
organisations themselv es funded by , or connected to, Bill Gates. As
y ou w ould expect with anything associated with Gates NewsGuard
has an oﬀshoot called HealthGuard which ‘ﬁghts online health care
hoaxes’. How v ery kind. Somehow the NewsGuard European
Managing Director Anna-Sophie Harling, a remarkably y oung-looking w oman with no broadcasting experience and li le hands-on
w ork in journalism, has somehow secured a position on the ‘Content
Board’ of UK gov ernment broadcast censor Ofcom. An executiv e of
an organisation seeking to discredit dissidents of the oﬃcial
narrativ es is making decisions for the gov ernment broadcast
‘regulator ’ about content?? Another appalling ‘fact-checker ’ is Full
Fact funded by George Soros and global censors Google and
Facebook.
It’ s amazing how many activists in the ‘fact-checking’, ‘anti-hate’,
arena turn up in gov ernment-related positions – people like UK
Labour P arty activist Imran Ahmed who heads the Center for
Countering Digital Hate founded by people like Morgan
McSw eeney , now chief of staﬀ to the Labour P arty’ s hapless and
useless ‘leader ’ Keir Starmer . Digital Hate – which is what it really is
– uses the American spelling of Center to betray its connection to a
transatlantic netw ork of similar organisations which in 2020
shapeshi ed from a acking people for ‘hate’ to a acking them for
questioning the ‘Covid’ hoax and the dangers of the ‘Covid v accine’.
It’ s just a coincidence, y ou understand. This is one of Imran Ahmed’ s
hysterical statements: ‘I w ould go bey ond calling anti-v axxers
conspiracy theorists to say they are an extremist group that pose a
national security risk.’ No one could ev er accuse this prat of
understatement and he’ s including in that those parents who are
now against v accines a er their children w ere damaged for life or
killed by them. He’ s such a nice man. Ahmed does the rounds of the
W oke media ge ing so -ball questions from spineless ‘journalists’
who nev er ask what right he has to campaign to destroy the freedom
of speech of others while he demands it for himself. There also
seems to be an ov errepresentation in Ofcom of people connected to
the narrativ e-w orshipping BBC. This incredible global netw ork of
narrativ e-support w as super -vital when the ‘Covid’ hoax w as play ed
in the light of the mega-whopper lies that hav e to be defended from
the spotlight cast by the most basic intelligence.
Setting the sceneThe Cult plays the long game and proceeds step-by-step ensuring
that ev erything is in place before major cards are play ed and they
don’ t come any bigger than the ‘Covid’ hoax. The psychopaths can’ t
handle ev ents where the outcome isn’ t certain and as li le as
possible – preferably nothing – is le  to chance. P oliticians,
gov ernment and medical oﬃcials who w ould follow direction w ere
brought to illusory pow er in adv ance by the Cult w eb whether on
the national stage or others like state gov ernors and may ors of
America. For decades the dynamic betw een oﬃcialdom, law
enforcement and the public w as changed from one of service to one
of control and dictatorship. Behaviour manipulation netw orks
established within gov ernment w ere w aiting to impose the coming
‘Covid’ rules and regulations speciﬁcally designed to subdue and
rewire the psyche of the people in the guise of protecting health.
These included in the UK the Behavioural Insights T eam part-owned
by the British gov ernment Cabinet Oﬃce; the Scientiﬁc P andemic
Insights Group on Behaviours (SPI-B); and a whole w eb of
intelligence and military groups seeking to direct the conv ersation
on social media and control the narrativ e. Among them are the
cyberw arfare (on the people) 77th Brigade of the British military
which is also coordinated through the Cabinet Oﬃce as civilian and
military leadership continues to combine in what they call the
Fusion Doctrine. The 77th Brigade is a British equiv alent of the
infamous Israeli (Sabbatian) military cyberw arfare and Internet
manipulation operation Unit 8200 which I expose at length in The
Trigger . Also carefully in place w ere the medical and science advisers
to gov ernment – many on the payroll past or present of Bill Gates –
and a whole alternativ e structure of unelected gov ernment stood by
to take control when elected parliaments w ere eﬀectiv ely closed
down once the ‘Covid’ card w as slammed on the table. The structure
I hav e described here and so much more w as installed in ev ery
major country through the Cult netw orks. The top-down control
hierarchy looks like this: The Cult – Cult-owned Gates – the W orld
Health Organization and T edros – Gates-funded or controlled chief
medical oﬃcers and science ‘advisers’ (dictators) in each country –political ‘leaders’– law enforcement – The P eople. Through this
simple global communication and enforcement structure the policy
of the Cult could be imposed on virtually the entire human
population so long as they acquiesced to the fascism. W ith
ev erything in place it w as time for the bu on to be pressed in late
2019/early 2020.
These w ere the prime goals the Cult had to secure for its will to
prev ail:
1) Locking down economies, closing all but designated ‘essential’ businesses (Cult-owned
corporations w ere ‘essential’), and pu ing the population under house arrest w as an
imperativ e to destroy independent income and employment and ensure dependency on the
Cult-controlled state in the Hunger Games Society . Lockdowns had to be established as the
global blueprint from the start to respond to the ‘virus’ and follow ed by pre y much the
entire w orld.
2) The global population had to be terriﬁed into believing in a deadly ‘virus’ that didn’ t
actually exist so they w ould unquestioningly obey authority in the belief that authority
must know how best to protect them and their families. So w are salesman Gates w ould
suddenly morph into the w orld’ s health expert and be promoted as such by the Cult-owned
media.
3) A method of testing that w asn’ t testing for the ‘virus’, but w as only claimed to be, had to
be in place to provide the illusion of ‘cases’ and subsequent ‘deaths’ that had a v ery
diﬀerent cause to the ‘Covid-19’ that w ould be scribbled on the death certiﬁcate.
4) Because there w as no ‘virus’ and the great majority testing positiv e with a test not testing
for the ‘virus’ w ould hav e no symptoms of anything the lie had to be sold that people
without symptoms (without the ‘virus’) could still pass it on to others. This w as crucial to
justify for the ﬁrst time quarantining – house arresting – healthy people. W ithout this the
economy-destroying lockdown of everybody  could not hav e been credibly sold.
5) The ‘saviour ’ had to be seen as a v accine which bey ond evil drug companies w ere
w orking like angels of mercy to dev elop as quickly as possible, with all corners cut, to sav e
the day . The public must absolutely not know that the ‘v accine’ had nothing to do with a
‘virus’ or that the contents w ere ready and w aiting with a v ery diﬀerent motiv e long before
the ‘Covid’ card w as ev en li ed from the pack.
I said in March, 2020, that the ‘v accine’ w ould hav e been created
w ay ahead of the ‘Covid’ hoax which justiﬁed its use and the
following December an article in the New Y ork Intelligencer
magazine said the Moderna ‘v accine’ had been ‘designed’ byJanuary , 2020. This w as ‘before China had ev en acknowledged that
the disease could be transmi ed from human to human, more than a
w eek before the ﬁrst conﬁrmed coronavirus case in the United
States’. The article said that by the time the ﬁrst American death w as
announced a month later ‘the v accine had already been
manufactured and shipped to the National Institutes of Health for
the beginning of its Phase I clinical trial’. The ‘v accine’ w as actually
‘designed’ long before that although ev en with this timescale y ou
w ould expect the article to ask how on earth it could hav e been done
that quickly . Instead it asked why the ‘v accine’ had not been rolled
out then and not months later . Journalism in the mainstream is truly
dead. I am going to detail in the next chapter why the ‘virus’ has
nev er existed and how a hoax on that scale w as possible, but ﬁrst the
foundation on which the Big Lie of ‘Covid’ w as built.
The test that doesn’t test
Fraudulent ‘testing’ is the bo om line of the whole ‘Covid’ hoax and
w as the means by which a ‘virus’ that did not exist appeared  to exist.
They could only achiev e this magic trick by using a test not testing
for the ‘virus’. T o use a test that was  testing for the ‘virus’ w ould
mean that ev ery test w ould come back negativ e giv en there w as no
‘virus’. They chose to exploit something called the RT -PCR test
inv ented by American biochemist Kary Mullis in the 1980s who said
publicly that his PCR test … cannot detect infectious disease . Y es, the
‘test’ used w orldwide to detect infectious ‘Covid’ to produce all the
illusory ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ compiled by Johns Hopkins and others
cannot detect infectious disease . This fact came from the mouth of the
man who inv ented PCR and w as aw arded the Nobel Prize in
Chemistry in 1993 for doing so. Sadly , and incredibly conv eniently
for the Cult, Mullis died in August, 2019, at the age of 74 just before
his test w ould be fraudulently used to unleash fascism on the w orld.
He w as said to hav e died from pneumonia which w as an irony in
itself. A few months later he w ould hav e had ‘Covid-19’ on his death
certiﬁcate. I say the timing of his death w as conv enient because had
he liv ed Mullis, a brilliant, honest and decent man, w ould hav e beenv ociferously speaking out against the use of his test to detect ‘Covid’
when it w as nev er designed, or able, to do that. I know that to be
true giv en that Mullis made the same point when his test w as used
to ‘detect’ – not detect – HIV . He had been seriously critical of the
Gallo/Montagnier claim to hav e isolated the HIV ‘virus’ and shown
it to cause AIDS for which Mullis said there w as no evidence. AIDS
is actually not a disease but a series of diseases from which people
die all the time. When they die from those same diseases  a er a
positiv e ‘test’ for HIV then AIDS goes on their death certiﬁcate. I
think I’v e heard that before somewhere. Countries instigated a
policy with ‘Covid’ that any one who tested positiv e with a test not
testing for the ‘virus’ and died of any other cause within 28 days and
ev en longer ‘Covid-19’ had to go on the death certiﬁcate. Cases hav e
come from the test that can’ t test for infectious disease and the
deaths are those who hav e died of anything  a er testing positiv e
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’. I’ll hav e much more later about
the death certiﬁcate scandal.
Mullis w as deeply dismissiv e of the now US ‘Covid’ star Anthony
Fauci who he said w as a liar who didn’ t know anything about
anything – ‘and I w ould say that to his face – nothing.’ He said of
Fauci: ‘The man thinks he can take a blood sample, put it in an
electron microscope and if it’ s got a virus in there y ou’ll know it – he
doesn’ t understand electron microscopy and he doesn’ t understand
medicine and shouldn’ t be in a position like he’ s in.’ That position,
terrifyingly , has made him the decider of ‘Covid’ fascism policy on
behalf of the Cult in his role as director since 1984 of the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) while his record
of being wrong is laughable; but being wrong, so long as it’ s the right
kind  of wrong, is why the Cult lov es him. He’ll say anything the Cult
tells him to say . Fauci w as made Chief Medical Adviser to the
President immediately Biden took oﬃce. Biden w as installed in the
White House by Cult manipulation and one of his ﬁrst decisions w as
to elev ate Fauci to a position of ev en more control. This is a
coincidence? Y es, and I identify as a ﬂamenco dancer called Lola.
How does such an incompetent criminal like Fauci remain in thatpiv otal position in American health since the 1980s ? When y ou serv e
the Cult it looks a er y ou until y ou are surplus to requirements.
Kary Mullis said prophetically of Fauci and his like: ‘Those guys
hav e an agenda and it’ s not an agenda w e w ould like them to hav e
… they make their own rules, they change them when they w ant to,
and T ony Fauci does not mind going on television in front of the
people who pay his salary and lie directly into the camera.’ Fauci has
done that almost daily since the ‘Covid’ hoax began. L ying is in
Fauci’ s DNA. T o make the situation crystal clear about the PCR test
this is a direct quote from its inv entor Kary Mullis:
It [the PCR test] doesn’t tell you that you’re sick and doesn’t tell you that the thing you ended
up with was really going to hurt you ...’
Ask y ourself why gov ernments and medical systems the w orld ov er
hav e been using this v ery test to decide who is ‘infected’ with the
SARS-CoV -2 ‘virus’ and the alleged disease it allegedly causes,
‘Covid-19’. The answ er to that question will tell y ou what has been
going on. By the w ay , here’ s a li le show-stopper – the ‘new’ SARS-
CoV -2 ‘virus’ w as ‘identiﬁed’ as such right from the start using … the
PCR test not testing for the ‘virus’ . If y ou are new to this and ﬁnd that
shocking then stick around. I hav e hardly started y et. Ev en w orse,
other ‘tests’, like the ‘Lateral Flow Device’ (LFD), are considered so
useless that they hav e to be confirmed  by the PCR test! Leaked emails
wri en by Ben Dyson, adviser to UK ‘Health’ Secretary Ma 
Hancock, said they w ere ‘dangerously unreliable’. Dyson, executiv e
director of strategy at the Department of Health, wrote: ‘ As of today ,
someone who gets a positiv e LFD result in (say) London has at best a
25 per cent chance of it being a true positiv e, but if it is a self-
reported test potentially as low as 10 per cent (on an optimistic
assumption about speciﬁcity) or as low as 2 per cent (on a more
pessimistic assumption).’ These are the ‘tests’ that schoolchildren
and the public are being urged to hav e twice a w eek or more and
hav e to isolate if they get a positiv e. Each fake positiv e goes in the
statistics as a ‘case’ no ma er how ludicrously inaccurate and the‘cases’ driv e lockdown, masks and the pressure to ‘v accinate’. The
gov ernment said in response to the email leak that the ‘tests’ w ere
accurate which conﬁrmed y et again what shocking bloody liars they
are. The real false positiv e rate is 100 percent  as w e’ll see. In another
‘y ou couldn’ t make it up’ the UK gov ernment agreed to pay £2.8
billion to California’ s Innov a Medical Group to supply the irrelev ant
lateral ﬂow tests. The company’ s primary test-making centre is in
China. Innov a Medical Group, established in March, 2020, is owned
by P asaca Capital Inc, chaired by Chinese-American millionaire
Charles Huang who w as born in W uhan.
How it works – and how it doesn’t
The RT -PCR test, known by its full title of P olymerase chain reaction,
is used across the w orld to make millions, ev en billions, of copies of
a DNA/RNA genetic information sample. The process is called
‘ampliﬁcation’ and means that a tiny sample of genetic material is
ampliﬁed to bring out the detailed content. I stress that it is not
testing for an infectious disease. It is simply amplifying a sample of
genetic material. In the w ords of Kary Mullis: ‘PCR is … just a
process that’ s used to make a whole lot of something out of
something.’ T o emphasise the point companies that make the PCR
tests circulated around the w orld to ‘test’ for ‘Covid’ w arn on the
box that it can’ t be used to detect ‘Covid’ or infectious disease and is
for research purposes only . It’ s okay , rest for a minute and y ou’ll be
ﬁne. This is the test that produces the ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ that hav e
been used to destroy human society . All those global and national
medical and scientiﬁc ‘experts’ demanding this destruction to ‘sav e
us’ KNOW  that the test is not testing for the ‘virus’ and the cases and
deaths they claim to be real are an almost unimaginable fraud. Ev ery
one of them and so many others including politicians and
psychopaths like Gates and T edros must be brought before
Nuremburg-type trials and jailed for the rest of their liv es. The more
the genetic sample is ampliﬁed by PCR the more elements of that
material become sensitiv e to the test and by that I don’ t mean
sensitiv e for a ‘virus’ but for elements of the genetic material whichis naturally  in the body or relates to remnants of old conditions of
v arious kinds lying dormant and causing no disease. Once the
ampliﬁcation of the PCR reaches a certain lev el everyone  will test
positiv e. So much of the material has been made sensitiv e to the test
that ev ery one will hav e some part of it in their body . Ev en lying
criminals like Fauci hav e said that once PCR ampliﬁcations pass 35
cycles ev erything will be a false positiv e that cannot be trusted for
the reasons I hav e described. I say , like many proper doctors and
scientists, that 100 percent of the ‘positiv es’ are false, but let’ s just go
with Fauci for a moment.
He says that any ampliﬁcation ov er 35 cycles will produce false
positiv es and y et the US Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) hav e recommended up to 40
cycles  and the National Health Service (NHS) in Britain admi ed in
an internal document for staﬀ that it w as using 45 cycles  of
ampliﬁcation. A long list of other countries has been doing the same
and at least one ‘testing’ laboratory has been using 50 cycles . Hav e
y ou ev er heard a doctor , medical ‘expert’ or the media ask what lev el
of ampliﬁcation has been used to claim a ‘positiv e’. The ‘test’ comes
back ‘positiv e’ and so y ou hav e the ‘virus’, end of story . Now w e can
see how the gov ernment in T anzania could send oﬀ samples from a
goat and a pawpaw fruit under human names and both came back
positiv e for ‘Covid-19’. T anzania president John Magufuli mocked
the ‘Covid’ hysteria, the PCR test and masks and refused to import
the DNA-manipulating ‘v accine’. The Cult hated him and an article
sponsored by the Bill Gates Foundation appeared in the London
Guardian  in February , 2021, headed ‘It’ s time for Africa to rein in
T anzania’ s anti-v axxer president’. W ell, ‘reined in’ he shortly w as.
Magufuli appeared in good health, but then, in March, 2021, he w as
dead at 61 from ‘heart failure’. He w as replaced by Samia Hassan
Suhulu who is connected to Klaus Schw ab’ s W orld Economic Forum
and she immediately rev ersed Magufuli’ s ‘Covid’ policy . A sample of
cola tested positiv e for ‘Covid’ with the PCR test in Germany while
American actress and singer -songwriter Erykah Badu tested positiv e
in one nostril and negativ e in the other . Footballer Ronaldo calledthe PCR test ‘bullshit’ a er testing positiv e three times and being
forced to quarantine and miss matches when there w as nothing
wrong with him. The mantra from T edros at the W orld Health
Organization and national gov ernments (same thing) has been test,
test, test. They know that the more tests they can generate the more
fake ‘cases’ they hav e which go on to become ‘deaths’ in w ays I am
coming to. The UK gov ernment has its Operation Moonshot planned
to test multiple millions ev ery day in w orkplaces and schools with
free tests for ev ery one to use twice a w eek at home in line with the
Cult plan from the start to make testing part of life. A gov ernment
adv ertisement for an ‘Interim Head of Asymptomatic T esting
Communication’ said the job included responsibility for deliv ering a
‘communications strategy’ (propaganda) ‘to support the expansion
of asymptomatic testing that ‘normalises testing as part of everyday life ’.
More tests means more fake ‘cases’, ‘deaths’ and fascism. I hav e
heard of, and from, many people who booked a test, couldn’ t turn
up, and y et got a positiv e result through the post for a test they’ d
nev er ev en had. The whole thing is crazy , but for the Cult there’ s
method in the madness. Controlling and manipulating the lev el of
ampliﬁcation of the test means the authorities can control whenev er
they w ant the number of apparent ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’. If they w ant
to justify more fascist lockdown and destruction of liv elihoods they
keep the ampliﬁcation high. If they w ant to giv e the illusion that
lockdowns and the ‘v accine’ are w orking then they low er the
ampliﬁcation and ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ will appear to fall. In January ,
2021, the Cult-owned W orld Health Organization suddenly w arned
laboratories about ov er -ampliﬁcation of the test and to low er the
threshold. Suddenly headlines began appearing such as: ‘Why ARE
“Covid” cases plummeting?’ This w as just when the v accine rollout
w as underw ay and I had predicted months before they w ould make
cases appear to fall through ampliﬁcation tampering when the
‘v accine’ came. These people are so predictable.
Cow vaccines?The question must be asked of what is on the test sw abs being poked
far up the nose of the population to the base of the brain? A nasal
sw ab punctured one w oman’ s brain and caused it to leak ﬂuid. Most
of these procedures are being done by people with li le training or
medical knowledge. Dr Lorraine Day , former orthopaedic trauma
surgeon and Chief of Orthopaedic Surgery at San Francisco General
Hospital, says the tests are really a ‘vaccine’ . Cows hav e long been
v accinated this w ay . She points out that masks hav e to cov er the nose
and the mouth where it is claimed the ‘virus’ exists in saliv a. Why
then don’ t they take saliv a from the mouth as they do with a DNA
test instead of pushing a long sw ab up the nose tow ards the brain?
The ethmoid bone separates the nasal cavity from the brain and
within that bone is the cribriform plate. Dr Day says that when the
sw ab is pushed up against this plate and twisted the procedure is
‘depositing things back there’. She claims that among these ‘things’
are nanoparticles that can enter the brain. Researchers hav e noted
that a team at the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins hav e designed tiny ,
star -shaped micro-devices that can latch onto intestinal mucosa and
release drugs into the body . Mucosa is the thin skin that cov ers the
inside surface of parts of the body such as the nose  and mouth and
produces mucus to protect them. The Johns Hopkins micro-devices
are called ‘theragrippers’ and w ere ‘inspired’ by a parasitic w orm
that digs its sharp teeth into a host’ s intestines. Nasal sw abs are also
coated in the sterilisation agent ethylene oxide. The US National
Cancer Institute posts this explanation on its w ebsite:
At room temperature, ethylene oxide is a flammable colorless gas with a sweet odor. It is used
primarily to produce other chemicals, including antifreeze. In smaller amounts, ethylene
oxide is used as a pesticide and a sterilizing agent. The ability of ethylene oxide to damage
DNA makes it an effective sterilizing agent but also accounts for its cancer-causing activity.
The Institute mentions lymphoma and leukaemia as cancers most
frequently reported to be associated with occupational exposure to
ethylene oxide along with stomach and breast cancers. How does
any one think this is going to w ork out with the constant testingregime being inﬂicted on adults and children at home and at school
that will accumulate in the body anything that’ s on the sw ab?
Doctors know best
It is vital for people to realise that ‘hero’ doctors ‘know’ only what
the Big Pharma-dominated medical authorities tell them to ‘know’
and if they refuse to ‘know’ what they are told to ‘know’ they are out
the door . They are mostly not physicians or healers, but repeaters of
the oﬃcial narrativ e – or else. I hav e seen alleged professional
doctors on British television make shocking statements that w e are
supposed to take seriously . One called ‘Dr ’ Amir Khan, who is
actually telling patients how to respond to illness, said that men
could take the birth pill to ‘help slow down the eﬀects of Covid-19’.
In March, 2021, another ridiculous ‘Covid study’ by an American
doctor proposed injecting men with the female sex hormone
progesterone as a ‘Covid’ treatment. British doctor Nighat Arif told
the BBC that face cov erings w ere now going to be part of ongoing
normal. Y es, the v accine protects y ou, she said (evidence?) … but the
w ay to deal with viruses in the community w as alw ays going to
come down to hand w ashing, face cov ering and keeping a physical
distance. That’ s not what w e w ere told before the ‘v accine’ w as
circulating. Arif said she couldn’ t imagine ev er again going on the
underground or in a li  without a mask. I w as just thanking my
good luck that she w as not my doctor when she said – in March,
2021 – that if ‘w e are behaving  and w e are doing all the right things’
she thought w e could ‘hav e our nearest and dearest around us at
home … around Christmas  and N ew Year!  Her patronising deliv ery
w as the usual school teacher talking to six-y ear -olds as she repeated
ev ery gov ernment talking point and probably believ ed them all. If
w e hav e learned anything from the ‘Covid’ experience surely it must
be that humanity’ s perception of doctors needs a fundamental
rethink. NHS ‘doctor ’ Sara Kay at told her television audience that
the ‘Covid v accine’ w ould ‘100 percent prev ent hospitalisation and
death’. Not ev en Big Pharma claimed that. W e hav e to stop taking
‘experts’ at their w ord without question when so many of them areclueless and only repeating the party line on which their careers
depend. That is not to say there are not brilliants doctors – there are
and I hav e spoken to many of them since all this began – but y ou
w on’ t see them in the mainstream media or quoted by the
psychopaths and y es-people in gov ernment.
Remember the name – Christian Drosten
German virologist Christian Drosten, Director of Charité Institute of
V irology in Berlin, became a national star a er the pandemic hoax
began. He w as feted on television and advised the German
gov ernment on ‘Covid’ policy . Most importantly to the wider w orld
Drosten led a group that produced the ‘Covid’ testing protocol for
the PCR test. What a remarkable feat giv en the PCR cannot test for
infectious disease and ev en more so when y ou think that Drosten
said that his method of testing for SARS-CoV -2 w as dev eloped
‘without having virus material av ailable’. He developed a test for a
‘virus’ that he didn’t have and had never seen . Let that sink in as y ou
surv ey the global dev astation that came from what he did. The
whole catastrophe of Drosten’ s ‘test’ w as based on the alleged
genetic sequence published by Chinese scientists on the Internet. W e
will see in the next chapter that this alleged ‘genetic sequence’ has
nev er been produced by China or any one and cannot be when there
is no  SARS-CoV -2. Drosten, how ev er , doesn’ t seem to let li le details
like that get in the w ay . He w as the lead author with V ictor Corman
from the same Charité Hospital of the paper ‘Detection of 2019 nov el
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time PCR‘ published in a magazine
called Eurosurveillance . This became known as the Corman-Drosten
paper . In Nov ember , 2020, with human society dev astated by the
eﬀects of the Corman-Drosten test baloney , the protocol w as publicly
challenged by 22 international scientists and independent
researchers from Europe, the United States, and Japan. Among them
w ere senior molecular geneticists, biochemists, immunologists, and
microbiologists. They produced a document headed ‘External peer
review of the RTPCR test to detect SARS-Cov-2 Rev eals 10 Major
Flaws At The Molecular and Methodological Lev el: Consequences•
•
•
•
•
•For False-P ositiv e Results’. The ﬂaws in the Corman-Drosten test
included the following:
 
The test is non-speciﬁc because of erroneous design
Results are enormously v ariable
The test is unable to discriminate betw een the whole ‘virus’ and
viral fragments
It doesn’ t hav e positiv e or negativ e controls
The test lacks a standard operating procedure
It is unsupported by proper peer view
 
The scientists said the PCR ‘Covid’ testing protocol w as not
founded on science and they demanded the Corman-Drosten paper
be retracted by Eurosurveillance . They said all present and previous
Covid deaths, cases, and ‘infection rates’ should be subject to a
massiv e retroactiv e inquiry . Lockdowns and trav el restrictions
should be review ed and relaxed and those diagnosed through PCR
to hav e ‘Covid-19’ should not be forced to isolate. Dr Kevin Corbe ,
a health researcher and nurse educator with a long academic career
producing a stream of peer -review ed publications at many UK
univ ersities, made the same point about the PCR test debacle. He
said of the scientists’ conclusions: ‘Ev ery scientiﬁc rationale for the
dev elopment of that test has been totally destroy ed by this paper . It’ s
like Hiroshima/Nagasaki to the Covid test.’ He said that China
hadn’ t giv en them an isolated ‘virus’ when Drosten dev eloped the
test. Instead they had dev eloped the test from a sequence in a gene
bank .’ Put another w ay … they made it up ! The scientists w ere
supported in this contention by a P ortuguese appeals court which
ruled in Nov ember , 2020, that PCR tests are unreliable and it is
unlawful to quarantine people based solely on a PCR test. The point
about China not providing an isolated virus must be true when the
‘virus’ has nev er been isolated to this day and the consequences of
that will become clear . Drosten and company produced this useless
‘protocol’ right on cue in January , 2020, just as the ‘virus’ w as said tobe moving w estw ard and it somehow managed to successfully pass
a peer -review in 24 hours. In other w ords there w as no peer -review
for a test that w ould be used to decide who had ‘Covid’ and who
didn’ t across the w orld. The Cult-created, Gates-controlled W orld
Health Organization immediately recommended all its nearly 200
member countries to use the Drosten PCR protocol to detect ‘cases’
and ‘deaths’. The sting w as underw ay and it continues to this day .
So who is this Christian Drosten that produced the means through
which death, destruction and economic catastrophe w ould be
justiﬁed? His education background, including his doctoral thesis,
w ould appear to be somewhat shrouded in mystery and his track
record is dire as with another essential play er in the ‘Covid’ hoax,
the Gates-funded Professor Neil Ferguson at the Gates-funded
Imperial College in London of whom more shortly . Drosten
predicted in 2003 that the alleged original SARS ‘virus’ (SARS-1’)
w as an epidemic that could hav e serious eﬀects on economies and an
eﬀectiv e v accine w ould take at least tw o y ears to produce. Drosten’ s
answ er to ev ery alleged ‘outbreak’ is a v accine which y ou w on’ t be
shocked to know . What follow ed w ere just 774 oﬃcial deaths
w orldwide and none in Germany where there w ere only nine cases.
That is ev en if y ou believ e there ev er w as a SARS ‘virus’ when the
evidence is zilch and I will expand on this in the next chapter .
Drosten claims to be co-discov erer of ‘SARS-1’ and dev eloped a test
for it in 2003. He w as screaming w arnings about ‘swine ﬂu’ in 2009
and how it w as a widespread infection far more sev ere than any
dangers from a v accine could be and people should get v accinated. It
w ould be helpful for Drosten’ s v ocal chords if he simply recorded
the w ords ‘the virus is deadly and y ou need to get v accinated’ and
copies could be handed out whenev er the latest made-up threat
comes along. Drosten’ s swine ﬂu epidemic nev er happened, but Big
Pharma didn’ t mind with gov ernments spending hundreds of
millions on v accines that hardly any one bothered to use and many
who did wished they hadn’ t. A study in 2010 rev ealed that the risk
of dying from swine ﬂu, or H1N1, w as no higher than that of the
annual seasonal ﬂu which is what at least most of ‘it’ really w as as inthe case of ‘Covid-19’. A media inv estigation into Drosten asked
how with such a record of inaccuracy he could be the  gov ernment
adviser on these issues. The answ er to that question is the same with
Drosten, Ferguson and Fauci – they keep on giving the authorities
the ‘conclusions’ and ‘advice’ they w ant to hear . Drosten certainly
produced the goods for them in January , 2020, with his PCR protocol
garbage and provided the foundation of what German internal
medicine specialist Dr Claus Köhnlein, co-author of Virus Mania ,
called the ‘test pandemic’. The 22 scientists in the Eurosurveillance
challenge called out conﬂicts of interest within the Drosten ‘protocol’
group and with good reason. Olfert Landt, a regular co-author of
Drosten ‘studies’, owns the biotech company TIB Molbiol
Syntheselabor GmbH in Berlin which manufactures and sells the
tests that Drosten and his mates come up with. They hav e done this
with SARS, Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC), MERS, Zika ‘virus’,
y ellow fev er , and now ‘Covid’. Landt told the Berliner Zeitung
newspaper:
The testing, design and development came from the Charité [Drosten and Corman]. We
simply implemented it immediately in the form of a kit. And if we don’t have the virus, which
originally only existed in Wuhan, we can make a synthetic gene to simulate the genome of the
virus. That’s what we did very quickly.
This is more conﬁrmation that the Drosten test w as designed
without access to the ‘virus’ and only a synthetic simulation which is
what SARS-CoV -2 really is – a computer -generated synthetic ﬁction.
It’ s quite an enterprise they hav e going here. A Drosten team decides
what the test for something should be and Landt’ s biotech company
ﬂogs it to gov ernments and medical systems across the w orld. His
company must hav e made an absolute fortune since the ‘Covid’ hoax
began. Dr Reiner Fuellmich, a prominent German consumer
protection trial lawy er in Germany and California, is on Drosten’ s
case and that of T edros at the W orld Health Organization for crimes
against humanity with a class-action lawsuit being prepared in the
United States and other legal action in Germany .Why China?
Scamming the w orld with a ‘virus’ that doesn’ t exist w ould seem
impossible on the face of it, but not if y ou hav e control of the
relativ ely few people that make policy decisions and the great
majority of the global media. Remember it’ s not about changing
‘real’ reality it’ s about controlling perception  of reality . Y ou don’ t hav e
to make something happen y ou only hav e make people believe  that
it’ s happening. Renegade Minds understand this and are therefore
much harder to swindle. ‘Covid-19’ is not a ‘real’ ‘virus’. It’ s a mind
virus, like a computer virus, which has infected the minds, not the
bodies, of billions. It all started, publically at least, in China and that
alone is of central signiﬁcance. The Cult w as behind the rev olution
led by its asset Mao Zedong, or Chairman Mao, which established
the P eople’ s Republic of China on October 1st, 1949. It should hav e
been called The Cult’ s Republic of China, but the name had to reﬂect
the recurring illusion that vicious dictatorships are run by and for
the people (see all the ‘Democratic Republics’ controlled by tyrants).
In the same w ay w e hav e the ‘Biden’ Democratic Republic of
America oﬃcially ruled by a puppet tyrant (at least temporarily) on
behalf of Cult tyrants. The creation of Mao’ s merciless
communist/fascist dictatorship w as part of a frenzy of activity by the
Cult at the conclusion of W orld W ar T w o which, like the First W orld
W ar , it had instigated through its assets in Germany , Britain, France,
the United States and elsewhere. Israel w as formed in 1948; the
Soviet Union expanded its ‘Iron Curtain’ control, inﬂuence and
military pow er with the W arsaw P act communist alliance in 1955;
the United Nations w as formed in 1945 as a Cult precursor to w orld
gov ernment; and a long list of w orld bodies w ould be established
including the W orld Health Organization (1948), W orld T rade
Organization (1948 under another name until 1995), International
Monetary Fund (1945) and W orld Bank (1944). Human society w as
redrawn and hugely centralised in the global Problem-Reaction-
Solution that w as W orld W ar T w o. All these changes w ere
signiﬁcant. Israel w ould become the headquarters of the Sabbatiansand the rev olution in China w ould prepare the ground and control
system for the ev ents of 2019/2020.
Renegade Minds know there are no borders except for public
consumption. The Cult is a seamless, borderless global entity and to
understand the game w e need to put aside labels like borders,
nations, countries, communism, fascism and democracy . These
delude the population into believing that countries are ruled within
their borders by a gov ernment of whatev er shade when these are
mere agencies of a global pow er . America’ s illusion of democracy
and China’ s communism/fascism are subsidiaries – v ehicles – for the
same agenda. W e may hear about conﬂict and competition betw een
America and China and on the low er lev els that will be true; but at
the Cult lev el they are branches of the same company in the w ay of
the McDonald’ s example I gav e earlier . I hav e tracked in the books
ov er the y ears support by US gov ernments of both parties for
Chinese Communist P arty inﬁltration of American society through
allowing the sale of land, ev en military facilities, and the acquisition
of American business and univ ersity inﬂuence. All this is
underpinned by the infamous stealing of intellectual property and
technological know-how . Cult-owned Silicon V alley corporations
w aiv e their fraudulent ‘morality’ to do business with human-rights-
free China; Cult-controlled Disney has become China’ s PR
department; and China in eﬀect owns ‘ American’ sports such as
basketball which depends for much of its income on Chinese
audiences. As a result any sports play er , coach or oﬃcial speaking
out against China’ s horriﬁc human rights record is immediately
condemned or ﬁred by the China-w orshipping National Basketball
Association. One of the ﬁrst acts of China-controlled Biden w as to
issue an executiv e order telling federal agencies to stop making
references to the ‘virus’ by the ‘geographic location of its origin’.
Long-time Congressman Jerry Nadler w arned that criticising China,
America’ s biggest riv al, leads to hate crimes against Asian people in
the United States. So shut up y ou bigot. China is fast closing in on
Israel as a country that must not be criticised which is apt, really ,
giv en that Sabbatians control them both. The tw o countries hav edev eloped close economic, military , technological and strategic ties
which include inv olv ement in China’ s ‘Silk Road’ transport and
economic initiativ e to connect China with Europe. Israel w as the ﬁrst
country in the Middle East to recognise the establishment of Mao’ s
tyranny in 1950 months a er it w as established.
Project Wuhan – the ‘Covid’ Psyop
I emphasise again that the Cult plays the long game and what is
happening to the w orld today is the result of centuries of calculated
manipulation following a script to take control step-by-step of ev ery
aspect of human society . I will discuss later the common force
behind all this that has spanned those centuries and thousands of
y ears if the truth be told. Instigating the Mao rev olution in China in
1949 with a 2020 ‘pandemic’ in mind is not only how they w ork – the
71 y ears betw een them is really quite short by the Cult’ s standards of
manipulation preparation. The reason for the Cult’ s Chinese
rev olution w as to create a ﬁercely-controlled environment within
which an extreme structure for human control could be incubated to
ev entually be unleashed across the w orld. W e hav e seen this happen
since the ‘pandemic’ emerged from China with the Chinese control-
structure founded on AI technology and tyrannical enforcement
sw eep across the W est. Until the moment when the Cult w ent for
broke in the W est and put its fascism on public display W estern
gov ernments had to pay some lip-service to freedom and democracy
to not alert too many people to the tyranny-in-the-making. Freedoms
w ere more subtly eroded and pow er centralised with cov ert
gov ernment structures put in place w aiting for the arriv al of 2020
when that smokescreen of ‘freedom’ could be dispensed with. The
W est w as not able to mov e tow ards tyranny before 2020 anything
like as fast as China which w as created as a tyranny and had no
limits on how fast it could construct the Cult’ s blueprint for global
control. When the time came to impose that structure on the w orld it
w as the same Cult-owned Chinese communist/fascist gov ernment
that provided the excuse – the ‘Covid pandemic’. It w as absolutely
crucial to the Cult plan for the Chinese response to the ‘pandemic’ –draconian lockdowns of the entire population – to become the
blueprint that W estern countries w ould follow to destroy the
liv elihoods and freedom of their people. This is why the Cult-
owned, Gates-owned, WHO Director -General T edros said early on:
The Chinese government is to be congratulated for the extraordinary measures it has taken to
contain the outbreak. China is actually setting a new standard for outbreak response and it is
not an exaggeration.
Forbes  magazine said of China: ‘… those measures protected untold
millions from ge ing the disease’. The Rockefeller Foundation
‘epidemic scenario’ document in 2010 said ‘prophetically’:
However, a few countries did fare better – China in particular. The Chinese government’s
quick imposition and enforcement of mandatory quarantine for all citizens, as well as its
instant and near-hermetic sealing off of all borders, saved millions of lives, stopping the spread
of the virus far earlier than in other countries and enabling a swifter post-pandemic recovery.
Once again – spooky .
The ﬁrst oﬃcial story w as the ‘bat theory’ or rather the bat
div ersion. The source of the ‘virus outbreak’ w e w ere told w as a
‘‘w et market’ in W uhan where bats and other animals are bought
and eaten in horriﬁcally unhygienic conditions. Then another story
emerged through the alternativ e media that the ‘virus’ had been
released on purpose or by accident from a BSL-4 (biosafety lev el 4)
laboratory in W uhan not far from the w et market. The lab w as
reported to create and w ork with lethal concoctions and
biow eapons. Biosafety lev el 4 is the highest in the W orld Health
Organization system of safety and containment. Renegade Minds are
aw are of what I call designer manipulation. The ideal for the Cult is
for people to buy its prime narrativ e which in the opening salv oes of
the ‘pandemic’ w as the w et market story . It knows, how ev er , that
there is now a considerable w orldwide alternativ e media of
researchers sceptical of anything gov ernments say and they are o en
giv en a v ersion of ev ents in a form they can perceiv e as credible
while misdirecting them from the real truth. In this case let themthink that the conspiracy inv olv ed is a ‘biow eapon virus’ released
from the W uhan lab to keep them from the real conspiracy – there is
no ‘virus’ . The WHO’ s current position on the source of the outbreak
at the time of writing appears to be: ‘W e hav en’ t got a clue, mate.’
This is a good position to maintain mystery and bewilderment. The
inner circle will know where the ‘virus’ came from – nowhere . The
bo om line w as to ensure the public believ ed there was  a ‘virus’ and
it didn’ t much ma er if they thought it w as natural or had been
released from a lab. The belief that there w as a ‘deadly virus’ w as all
that w as needed to trigger global panic and fear . The population w as
terriﬁed into handing their pow er to authority and doing what they
w ere told. They had to or they w ere ‘all gonna die’.
In March, 2020, information began to come my w ay from real
doctors and scientists and my own additional research which had
my intuition screaming: ‘Y es, that’ s it! There is no virus .’ The
‘biow eapon’ w as not the ‘virus’; it w as the ‘vaccine’  already being
talked about that w ould be the biow eapon. My conclusion w as
further enhanced by happenings in W uhan. The ‘virus’ w as said to
be sw eeping the city and news footage circulated of people
collapsing in the street (which they’v e nev er done in the W est with
the same ‘virus’). The Chinese gov ernment w as building ‘new
hospitals’ in a ma er of ten days to ‘cope with demand’ such w as the
virulent nature of the ‘virus’. Y et in what seemed like no time the
‘new hospitals’ closed – ev en if they ev en opened – and China
declared itself ‘virus-free’. It w as back to business as usual. This w as
more propaganda to promote the Chinese draconian lockdowns in
the W est as the w ay to ‘beat the virus’. T rouble w as that w e
subsequently had lockdown a er lockdown, but nev er business as
usual. As the people of the W est and most of the rest of the w orld
w ere caught in an ev er -w orsening spiral of lockdown, social
distancing, masks, isolated old people, families forced apart, and
liv elihood destruction, it w as party-time in W uhan. Pictures
emerged of thousands of people enjoying pool parties and concerts.
It made no sense until y ou realised there nev er w as a ‘virus’ and thewhole thing w as a Cult set-up to transform human society out of one
its major global strongholds – China.
How is it possible to deceiv e virtually the entire w orld population
into believing there is a deadly virus when there is not ev en a ‘virus’
let alone a deadly one? It’ s nothing like as diﬃcult as y ou w ould
think and that’ s clearly true because it happened.
Postscript:  See end of book P ostscript for more on the ‘W uhan lab
virus release’ story which the authorities and media w ere pushing
heavily in the summer of 2021 to div ert a ention from the truth that
the ‘Covid virus’ is pure inv ention.TCHAPTER FIVE
There is no ‘virus’
You can fool some of the people all of the time, and all of the people
some of the time, but you cannot fool all of the people all of the time
Abraham Lincoln
he greatest form of mind control is repetition. The more y ou
repeat the same mantra of alleged ‘facts’ the more will accept
them to be true. It becomes an ‘ev ery one knows that, mate’. If y ou
can also censor any other v ersion or alternativ e to y our alleged
‘facts’ y ou are pre y much home and cooking.
By the start of 2020 the Cult owned the global mainstream media
almost in its entirety to spew out its ‘Covid’ propaganda and ignore
or discredit any other information and view . Cult-owned social
media platforms in Cult-owned Silicon V alley w ere poised and
ready to unleash a campaign of ferocious censorship to obliterate all
but the oﬃcial narrativ e. T o complete the circle many demands for
censorship by Silicon V alley w ere led by the mainstream media as
‘journalists’ became full-out enforcers for the Cult both as
propagandists and censors. P art of this has been the inﬂux of y oung
people straight out of univ ersity who hav e become ‘journalists’ in
signiﬁcant positions. They hav e no experience and a headful of
programmed perceptions from their y ears at school and univ ersity at
a time when today’ s y oung are the most perceptually-targeted
generations in known human history giv en the insidious impact of
technology . They enter the media perceptually prepared and ready
to repeat the narrativ es of the system that programmed them torepeat its narrativ es. The BBC has a truly pathetic ‘specialist
disinformation reporter ’ called Marianna Spring who ﬁts this bill
perfectly . She is clueless about the w orld, how it w orks and what is
really going on. Her role is to discredit any one doing the job that a
proper journalist w ould do and system-serving hacks like Spring
w ouldn’ t dare to do or ev en see the need to do. They are too busy
licking the arse of authority which can nev er be wrong and, in the
case of the BBC propaganda programme, Panorama , contacting
payments systems such as P ayP al to hav e a donations page taken
down for a ﬁlm company making documentaries questioning
v accines. Ev en the BBC soap opera EastEnders  included a
disgracefully biased scene in which an inarticulate white w orking
class w oman w as made to look foolish for questioning the ‘v accine’
while a w ell-spoken black man and Asian w oman promoted the
gov ernment narrativ e. It ticked ev ery BBC box and the fact that the
black and minority community w as resisting the ‘v accine’ had
nothing to do with the w ay the scene w as wri en. The BBC has
become a disgusting tyrannical propaganda and censorship
operation that should be defunded and disbanded and a free media
take its place with a brief to stop censorship instead of demanding it.
A BBC ‘interview’ with Gates goes something like: ‘Mr Gates, sir , if I
can call y ou sir , w ould y ou like to tell our audience why y ou are
such a great man, a w onderful humanitarian philanthropist, and
why y ou should absolutely be allow ed as a so w are salesman to
decide health policy for approaching eight billion people? Thank
y ou, sir , please sir .’ Propaganda programming has been incessant
and merciless and when all y ou hear is the same story from the
media, repeated by those around y ou who hav e only heard the same
story , is it any w onder that people on a grand scale believ e absolute
mendacious garbage to be true? Y ou are about to see, too, why this
lev el of information control is necessary when the oﬃcial ‘Covid’
narrativ e is so nonsensical and unsupportable by the evidence.
Structure of DeceitThe pyramid structure through which the ‘Covid’ hoax has been
manifested is v ery simple and has to be to w ork. As few people as
possible hav e to be inv olv ed with full knowledge of what they are
doing – and why – or the real story w ould get out. At the top of the
pyramid are the inner core of the Cult which controls Bill Gates who,
in turn, controls the W orld Health Organization through his piv otal
funding and his puppet Director -General mouthpiece, T edros.
Before he w as appointed T edros w as chair of the Gates-founded
Global Fund to ‘ﬁght against AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria’, a
board member of the Gates-funded ‘v accine alliance’ GA VI, and on
the board of another Gates-funded organisation. Gates owns him
and picked him for a speciﬁc reason – T edros is a crook and w orse.
‘Dr ’ T edros (he’ s not a medical doctor , the ﬁrst WHO chief not to be)
w as a member of the tyrannical Marxist gov ernment of Ethiopia for
decades with all its human rights abuses. He has faced allegations of
corruption and misappropriation of funds and w as exposed three
times for cov ering up cholera epidemics while Ethiopia’ s health
minister . T edros appointed the mass-murdering genocidal
Zimbabw e dictator Robert Mugabe as a WHO goodwill ambassador
for public health which, as with T edros, is like appointing a
psychopath to run a peace and lov e campaign. The mov e w as so
ridiculous that he had to drop Mugabe in the face of widespread
condemnation. American economist David Steinman, a Nobel peace
prize nominee, lodged a complaint with the International Criminal
Court in The Hague ov er alleged genocide by T edros when he w as
Ethiopia’ s foreign minister . Steinman says T edros w as a ‘crucial
decision maker ’ who directed the actions of Ethiopia’ s security forces
from 2013 to 2015 and one of three oﬃcials in charge when those
security services embarked on the ‘killing’ and ‘torturing’ of
Ethiopians. Y ou can see where T edros is coming from and it’ s
sobering to think that he has been the v ehicle for Gates and the Cult
to direct the global response to ‘Covid’. Think about that. A
psychopathic Cult dictates to psychopath Gates who dictates to
psychopath T edros who dictates how countries of the w orld must
respond to a ‘Covid virus’ nev er scientiﬁcally shown to exist. At the
same time psychopathic Cult-owned Silicon V alley informationgiants like Google, Y ouT ube, Facebook and T wi er announced v ery
early on that they w ould giv e the Cult/Gates/T edros/WHO v ersion
of the narrativ e free adv ertising and censor those who challenged
their intelligence-insulting, mendacious story .
The next lay er in the global ‘medical’ structure below the Cult,
Gates and T edros are the chief medical oﬃcers and science ‘advisers’
in each of the WHO member countries which means virtually all of
them. Medical oﬃcers and arbiters of science (they’ re not) then take
the WHO policy and recommended responses and impose them on
their country’ s population while the political ‘leaders’ say they are
deciding policy (they’ re clearly not) by ‘following the science’ on the
advice of the ‘experts’ – the same medical oﬃcers and science
‘advisers’ (dictators). In this w ay with the rarest of exceptions the
entire w orld follow ed the same policy of lockdown, people
distancing, masks and ‘v accines’ dictated by the psychopathic Cult,
psychopathic Gates and psychopathic T edros who w e are supposed
to believ e giv e a damn about the health of the w orld population they
are seeking to enslav e. That, amazingly , is all there is to it in terms of
crucial decision-making. Medical staﬀ in each country then follow
like sheep the dictates of the shepherds at the top of the national
medical hierarchies – chief medical oﬃcers and science ‘advisers’
who themselv es follow like sheep the shepherds of the W orld Health
Organization and the Cult. Shepherds at the national lev el o en
hav e major funding and other connections to Gates and his Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation which carefully hands out money like
confe i at a w edding to control the entire global medical system
from the WHO down.
Follow the money
Christopher Whi y , Chief Medical Adviser to the UK Gov ernment at
the centre of ‘virus’ policy , a senior adviser to the gov ernment’ s
Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE), and Executiv e
Board member of the W orld Health Organization, w as gi ed a grant
of $40 million by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation for malaria
research in Africa. The BBC described the unelected Whi y as ‘theoﬃcial who will probably hav e the greatest impact on our ev eryday
liv es of any individual policymaker in modern times’ and so it
turned out. What Gates and T edros hav e said Whi y has done like
his equiv alents around the w orld. P atrick V allance, co-chair of SAGE
and the gov ernment’ s Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser , is a former executiv e
of Big Pharma giant GlaxoSmithKline with its fundamental ﬁnancial
and business connections to Bill Gates. In September , 2020, it w as
rev ealed that V allance owned a deferred bonus of shares in
GlaxoSmithKline w orth £600,000 while the company w as
‘dev eloping’ a ‘Covid v accine’. Mov e along now – nothing to see
here – what could possibly be wrong with that? Imperial College in
London, a major play er in ‘Covid’ policy in Britain and elsewhere
with its ‘Covid-19’ Response T eam, is funded by Gates and has big
connections to China while the now infamous Professor Neil
Ferguson, the useless ‘computer modeller ’ at Imperial College is also
funded by Gates. Ferguson deliv ered the dramatically inaccurate
excuse for the ﬁrst lockdowns (much more in the next chapter). The
Institute for Health Metrics and Ev aluation (IHME) in the United
States, another source of outrageously false ‘Covid’ computer
models to justify lockdowns, is bankrolled by Gates who is a
v ehement promotor of lockdowns. America’ s v ersion of Whi y and
V allance, the again now infamous Anthony Fauci, has connections to
‘Covid v accine’ maker Moderna as does Bill Gates through funding
from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Fauci is director of the
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), a
major recipient of Gates money , and they are v ery close. Deborah
Birx who w as appointed White House Coronavirus Response
Coordinator in February , 2020, is y et another with ties to Gates.
Ev erywhere y ou look at the diﬀerent elements around the w orld
behind the coordination and decision making of the ‘Covid’ hoax
there is Bill Gates and his money . They include the W orld Health
Organization; Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in the United
States; National Institutes of Health (NIH) of Anthony Fauci;
Imperial College and Neil Ferguson; the London School of Hygiene
where Chris Whi y w orked; Regulatory agencies like the UK
Medicines & Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)which gav e emergency approv al for ‘Covid v accines’; W ellcome
T rust; GA VI, the V accine Alliance; the Coalition for Epidemic
Preparedness Innov ations (CEPI); Johns Hopkins Univ ersity which
has compiled the false ‘Covid’ ﬁgures; and the W orld Economic
Forum. A Nationalﬁle.com  article said:
G a t e s  h a s  a  l o t  o f  p u l l  i n  t h e  m e d i c a l  w o r l d ,  h e  h a s  a  m u l t i - m i l l i o n  d o l l a r  r e l a t i o n s h i p  w i t h  D r .
F a u c i ,  a n d  F a u c i  o r i g i n a l l y  t o o k  t h e  G a t e s  l i n e  s u p p o r t i n g  v a c c i n e s  a n d  c a s t i n g  d o u b t  o n  [ t h e
d r u g  h y d r o x y c h l o r o q u i n e ] .  C o r o n a v i r u s  r e s p o n s e  t e a m  m e m b e r  D r .  D e b o r a h  B i r x ,  a p p o i n t e d
b y  f o r m e r  p r e s i d e n t  O b a m a  t o  s e r v e  a s  U n i t e d  S t a t e s  G l o b a l  A I D S  C o o r d i n a t o r ,  a l s o  s i t s  o n  t h e
b o a r d  o f  a  g r o u p  t h a t  h a s  r e c e i v e d  b i l l i o n s  f r o m  G a t e s ’  f o u n d a t i o n ,  a n d  B i r x  r e p o r t e d l y  u s e d  a
d i s p u t e d  B i l l  G a t e s - f u n d e d  m o d e l  f o r  t h e  W h i t e  H o u s e ’ s  C o r o n a v i r u s  e f f o r t .  G a t e s  i s  a  b i g
p r o p o n e n t  f o r  a  p o p u l a t i o n  l o c k d o w n  s c e n a r i o  f o r  t h e  C o r o n a v i r u s  o u t b r e a k .
Another funder of Moderna is the Defense Adv anced Research
Projects Agency (DARP A), the technology-dev elopment arm of the
P entagon and one of the most sinister organisations on earth.
DARP A had a major role with the CIA cov ert technology-funding
operation In-Q- T el in the dev elopment of Google and social media
which is now at the centre of global censorship. Fauci and Gates are
extremely close and openly admit to talking regularly about ‘Covid’
policy , but then why w ouldn’ t Gates hav e a seat at ev ery national
‘Covid’ table a er his Foundation commi ed $1.75 billion to the
‘ﬁght against Covid-19’. When passed through our Orw ellian
T ranslation Unit this means that he has bought and paid for the Cult-
driv en ‘Covid’ response w orldwide. Research the major ‘Covid’
response personnel in y our own country and y ou will ﬁnd the same
Gates funding and other connections again and again. Medical and
science chiefs following W orld Health Organization ‘policy’ sit atop
a medical hierarchy in their country of administrators, doctors and
nursing staﬀ. These ‘subordinates’ are told they must w ork and
behav e in accordance with the policy deliv ered from the ‘top’ of the
national ‘health’ pyramid which is largely the policy deliv ered by
the WHO which is the policy deliv ered by Gates and the Cult. The
whole ‘Covid’ narrativ e has been imposed on medical staﬀ by a
climate of fear although great numbers don’ t ev en need that to
comply . They do so through breathtaking lev els of ignorance andinclude doctors who go through life simply repeating what Big
Pharma and their hierarchical masters tell them to say and believ e.
No w onder Big Pharma ‘medicine’ is one of the biggest killers on
Planet Earth.
The same top-down system of intimidation operates with regard
to the Cult Big Pharma cartel which also dictates policy through
national and global medical systems in this w ay . The Cult and Big
Pharma agendas are the same because the former controls and owns
the la er . ‘Health’ administrators, doctors, and nursing staﬀ are told
to support and parrot the dictated policy or they will face
consequences which can include being ﬁred. How sad it’ s been to see
medical staﬀ meekly repeating and imposing Cult policy without
question and most of those who can see through the deceit are only
willing to speak anonymously oﬀ the record. They know what will
happen if their identity is known. This has le  the courageous few to
expose the lies about the ‘virus’, face masks, ov erwhelmed hospitals
that aren’ t, and the dangers of the ‘v accine’ that isn’ t a v accine. When
these medical professionals and scientists, some renowned in their
ﬁeld, hav e taken to the Internet to expose the truth their articles,
comments and videos hav e been deleted by Cult-owned Facebook,
T wi er and Y ouT ube. What a real head-shaker to see Y ouT ube
videos with leading w orld scientists and highly qualiﬁed medical
specialists with an added link underneath to the notorious Cult
propaganda w ebsite Wikipedia  to ﬁnd the ‘facts’ about the same
subject.
HIV – the ‘Covid’ trial-run
I’ll giv e y ou an example of the consequences for health and truth
that come from censorship and unquestioning belief in oﬃcial
narrativ es. The story w as told by PCR inv entor Kary Mullis in his
book Dancing Naked in the Mind Field . He said that in 1984 he
accepted as just another scientiﬁc fact that Luc Montagnier of
France’ s P asteur Institute and Robert Gallo of America’ s National
Institutes of Health had independently discov ered that a ‘retrovirus’
dubbed HIV (human immunodeﬁciency virus) caused AIDS. Theyw ere, a er all, Mullis writes, specialists in retroviruses. This is how
the medical and science pyramids w ork. Something is announced or
assumed  and then becomes an ev erybody-knows-that purely through
repetition of the assumption as if it is fact. Complete crap becomes
accepted truth with no supporting evidence and only repetition of
the crap. This is how a ‘virus’ that doesn’ t exist became the ‘virus’
that changed the w orld. The HIV -AIDS fairy story became a multi-
billion pound industry and the media poured out propaganda
terrifying the w orld about the deadly HIV ‘virus’ that caused the
lethal AIDS. By then Mullis w as w orking at a lab in Santa Monica,
California, to detect retroviruses with his PCR test in blood
donations receiv ed by the Red Cross. In doing so he asked a
virologist where he could ﬁnd a reference for HIV being the cause of
AIDS. ‘Y ou don’ t need a reference,’ the virologist said … ‘Everybody
knows it.’  Mullis said he w anted to quote a reference in the report he
w as doing and he said he felt a li le funny about not knowing the
source of such an important discov ery when ev ery one else seemed
to. The virologist suggested he cite a report by the Centers for
Disease Control and Prev ention (CDC) on morbidity and mortality .
Mullis read the report, but it only said that an organism had been
identiﬁed and did not say how . The report did not identify the
original scientiﬁc w ork. Physicians, how ev er , assumed  (key recurring
theme) that if the CDC w as convinced that HIV caused AIDS then
proof must exist. Mullis continues:
I  d i d  c o m p u t e r  s e a r c h e s .  N e i t h e r  M o n t a g n i e r ,  G a l l o ,  n o r  a n y o n e  e l s e  h a d  p u b l i s h e d  p a p e r s
d e s c r i b i n g  e x p e r i m e n t s  w h i c h  l e d  t o  t h e  c o n c l u s i o n  t h a t  H I V  p r o b a b l y  c a u s e d  A I D S .  I  r e a d
t h e  p a p e r s  i n  S c i e n c e  f o r  w h i c h  t h e y  h a d  b e c o m e  w e l l  k n o w n  a s  A I D S  d o c t o r s ,  b u t  a l l  t h e y
h a d  s a i d  t h e r e  w a s  t h a t  t h e y  h a d  f o u n d  e v i d e n c e  o f  a  p a s t  i n f e c t i o n  b y  s o m e t h i n g  w h i c h  w a s
p r o b a b l y  H I V  i n  s o m e  A I D S  p a t i e n t s .
T h e y  f o u n d  a n t i b o d i e s .  A n t i b o d i e s  t o  v i r u s e s  h a d  a l w a y s  b e e n  c o n s i d e r e d  e v i d e n c e  o f  p a s t
d i s e a s e ,  n o t  p r e s e n t  d i s e a s e .  A n t i b o d i e s  s i g n a l e d  t h a t  t h e  v i r u s  h a d  b e e n  d e f e a t e d .  T h e  p a t i e n t
h a d  s a v e d  h i m s e l f .  T h e r e  w a s  n o  i n d i c a t i o n  i n  t h e s e  p a p e r s  t h a t  t h i s  v i r u s  c a u s e d  a  d i s e a s e .
T h e y  d i d n ’ t  s h o w  t h a t  e v e r y b o d y  w i t h  t h e  a n t i b o d i e s  h a d  t h e  d i s e a s e .  I n  f a c t  t h e y  f o u n d  s o m e
h e a l t h y  p e o p l e  w i t h  a n t i b o d i e s .Mullis asked why their w ork had been published if Montagnier
and Gallo hadn’ t really found this evidence, and why had they been
ﬁghting so hard to get credit for the discov ery? He says he w as
hesitant to write ‘HIV is the probable cause of AIDS’ until he found
published evidence to support that. ‘T ens of thousands of scientists
and researchers w ere spending billions of dollars a y ear doing
research based on this idea,’ Mullis writes. ‘The reason had to be
there somewhere; otherwise these people w ould not hav e allow ed
their research to se le into one narrow channel of inv estigation.’ He
said he lectured about PCR at numerous meetings where people
w ere alw ays talking about HIV and he asked them how they knew
that HIV w as the cause of AIDS:
E v e r y o n e  s a i d  s o m e t h i n g .  E v e r y o n e  h a d  t h e  a n s w e r  a t  h o m e ,  i n  t h e  o f f i c e ,  i n  s o m e  d r a w e r .
T h e y  a l l  k n e w ,  a n d  t h e y  w o u l d  s e n d  m e  t h e  p a p e r s  a s  s o o n  a s  t h e y  g o t  b a c k .  B u t  I  n e v e r  g o t
a n y  p a p e r s .  N o b o d y  e v e r  s e n t  m e  t h e  n e w s  a b o u t  h o w  A I D S  w a s  c a u s e d  b y  H I V .
Ev entually Mullis w as able to ask Montagnier himself about the
reference proof when he lectured in San Diego at the grand opening
of the Univ ersity of California AIDS Research Center . Mullis says
this w as the last time he w ould ask his question without showing
anger . Montagnier said he should reference the CDC report. ‘I read
it’, Mullis said, and it didn’ t answ er the question. ‘If Montagnier
didn’ t know the answ er who the hell did?’ Then one night Mullis
w as driving when an interview came on National Public Radio with
P eter Duesberg, a prominent virologist at Berkeley and a California
Scientist of the Y ear . Mullis says he ﬁnally understood why he could
not ﬁnd references that connected HIV to AIDS – there weren’t any!
No one had ev er prov ed that HIV causes AIDS ev en though it had
spawned a multi-billion pound global industry and the media w as
repeating this as fact ev ery day in their articles and broadcasts
terrifying the shit out of people about AIDS and giving the
impression that a positiv e test for HIV (see ‘Covid’) w as a death
sentence. Duesberg w as a threat to the AIDS gravy train and the
agenda that underpinned it. He w as therefore abused and castigated
a er he told the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciencesthere w as no good evidence implicating the new ‘virus’. Editors
rejected his manuscripts and his research funds w ere deleted. Mullis
points out that the CDC has deﬁned AIDS as one of more than 30
diseases if accompanied  by a positiv e result on a test that detects
antibodies to HIV ; but those same diseases are not deﬁned as AIDS
cases when antibodies are not detected:
I f  a n  H I V - p o s i t i v e  w o m a n  d e v e l o p s  u t e r i n e  c a n c e r ,  f o r  e x a m p l e ,  s h e  i s  c o n s i d e r e d  t o  h a v e
A I D S .  I f  s h e  i s  n o t  H I V  p o s i t i v e ,  s h e  s i m p l y  h a s  u t e r i n e  c a n c e r .  A n  H I V - p o s i t i v e  m a n  w i t h
t u b e r c u l o s i s  h a s  A I D S ;  i f  h e  t e s t s  n e g a t i v e  h e  s i m p l y  h a s  t u b e r c u l o s i s .  I f  h e  l i v e s  i n  K e n y a  o r
C o l o m b i a ,  w h e r e  t h e  t e s t  f o r  H I V  a n t i b o d i e s  i s  t o o  e x p e n s i v e ,  h e  i s  s i m p l y  p r e s u m e d  t o  h a v e
t h e  a n t i b o d i e s  a n d  t h e r e f o r e  A I D S ,  a n d  t h e r e f o r e  h e  c a n  b e  t r e a t e d  i n  t h e  W o r l d  H e a l t h
O r g a n i z a t i o n ’ s  c l i n i c .  I t ’ s  t h e  o n l y  m e d i c a l  h e l p  a v a i l a b l e  i n  s o m e  p l a c e s .  A n d  i t ’ s  f r e e ,
b e c a u s e  t h e  c o u n t r i e s  t h a t  s u p p o r t  W H O  a r e  w o r r i e d  a b o u t  A I D S .
Mullis accuses the CDC of continually adding new diseases (see ev er
more ‘Covid symptoms’) to the grand AIDS deﬁnition and of
virtually doctoring the books to make it appear as if the disease
continued to spread. He cites how in 1993 the CDC enormously
broadened its AIDS deﬁnition and county health authorities w ere
delighted because they receiv ed $2,500 per y ear from the Federal
gov ernment for ev ery reported AIDS case. Ladies and gentlemen, I
hav e just described, via Kary Mullis, the ‘Covid pandemic’ of 2020
and bey ond. Ev ery element is the same and it’ s been pulled oﬀ in the
same w ay by the same netw orks.
The ‘Covid virus’ exists? Okay – prove it. Er … still waiting
What Kary Mullis described with regard to ‘HIV’ has been repeated
with ‘Covid’. A claim is made that a new , or ‘nov el’, infection has
been found and the entire medical system of the w orld repeats that
as fact exactly as they did with HIV and AIDS. No one in the
mainstream asks rather relev ant questions such as ‘How do y ou
know?’ and ‘Where is y our proof ?’ The SARS-Cov-2 ‘virus’ and the
‘Covid-19 disease’ became an ov ernight ‘ev erybody-knows-that’.
The origin could be debated and mulled ov er , but what y ou could
not suggest w as that ‘SARS-Cov-2’ didn’ t exist. That w ould beridiculous. ‘Ev erybody knows’ the ‘virus’ exists. W ell, I didn’ t for
one along with American proper doctors like Andrew Kaufman and
T om Cow an and long-time American proper journalist Jon
Rappaport. W e dared to pursue the obvious and simple question:
‘Where’ s the evidence?’ The ov erwhelming majority in medicine,
journalism and the general public did not think to ask that. A er all,
everyone knew  there w as a new ‘virus’. Ev ery one w as saying so and I
heard it on the BBC. Some w ould ev entually argue that the ‘deadly
virus’ w as nothing like as deadly as claimed, but few w ould v enture
into the realms of its v ery existence. Had they done so they w ould
hav e found that the evidence for that claim had gone A WOL as with
HIV causes AIDS. In fact, not ev en that. For something to go A WOL
it has to exist in the ﬁrst place and scientiﬁc proof for a ‘SARS-Cov-2’
can be ﬁled under nothing, nowhere and zilch.
Dr Andrew Kaufman is a board-certiﬁed forensic psychiatrist in
New Y ork State, a Doctor of Medicine and former Assistant
Professor and Medical Director of Psychiatry at SUNY Upstate
Medical Univ ersity , and Medical Instructor of Hematology and
Oncology at the Medical School of South Carolina. He also studied
biology at the Massachuse s Institute of T echnology (MIT) and
trained in Psychiatry at Duke Univ ersity . Kaufman is retired from
allopathic medicine, but remains a consultant and educator on
natural healing, I saw a video of his v ery early on in the ‘Covid’ hoax
in which he questioned claims about the ‘virus’ in the absence of any
supporting evidence and with plenty pointing the other w ay . I did
ev erything I could to circulate his w ork which I felt w as asking the
piv otal questions that needed an answ er . I can recommend an
excellent pull-together interview he did with the w ebsite The Last
V agabond entitled Dr Andrew Kaufman: Virus Isolation, Terrain Theory
and  Covid-19  and his w ebsite is andrewkaufmanmd.com . Kaufman is
not only a forensic psychiatrist; he is forensic in all that he does. He
alw ays reads original scientiﬁc papers, experiments and studies
instead of second-third-fourth-hand reports about the ‘virus’ in the
media which are repeating the repeated repetition of the narrativ e.
When he did so with the original Chinese ‘virus’ papers Kaufmanrealised that there w as no evidence of a ‘SARS-Cov-2’. They had
nev er – from the start – shown it to exist and ev ery repeat of this
claim w orldwide w as based on the accepted existence of proof that
w as nowhere to be found – see Kary Mullis and HIV . Here w e go
again.
Let’s postulate
Kaufman discov ered that the Chinese authorities immediately
concluded that the cause of an illness that broke out among about
200 initial patients in W uhan w as a ‘new virus’ when there w ere no
grounds to make that conclusion. The alleged ‘virus’ w as not
isolated from other genetic material in their samples and then shown
through a system known as Koch’ s postulates to be the causativ e
agent of the illness. The w orld w as told that the SARS-Cov-2 ‘virus’
caused a disease they called ‘Covid-19’ which had ‘ﬂu-like’
symptoms and could lead to respiratory problems and pneumonia.
If it w asn’ t so tragic it w ould almost be funny . ‘Flu-like’ symptoms’?
Pneumonia? Respiratory disease?  What in CHINA  and particularly in
Wuhan , one of the most polluted cities in the w orld with a resulting
epidemic of respiratory disease?? Three hundred thousand people
get pneumonia in China ev ery y ear and there are nearly a billion
cases w orldwide of ‘ﬂu-like symptoms’. These hav e a whole range of
causes – including pollution in W uhan – but no other possibility w as
credibly considered in late 2019 when the w orld w as told there w as a
new and deadly ‘virus’. The global prev alence of pneumonia and
‘ﬂu-like systems’ gav e the Cult netw orks unlimited potential to re-
diagnose these other causes as the mythical ‘Covid-19’ and that is
what they did from the v ery start. Kaufman rev ealed how Chinese
medical and science authorities (all subordinates to the Cult-owned
communist gov ernment) took genetic material from the lungs of
only a few of the ﬁrst patients. The material contained their own
cells, bacteria, fungi and other microorganisms living in their bodies.
The only w ay y ou could prov e the existence of the ‘virus’ and its
responsibility for the alleged ‘Covid-19’ w as to isolate the virus from
all the other material – a process also known as ‘puriﬁcation’ – andthen follow the postulates sequence dev eloped in the late 19th
century by German physician and bacteriologist Robert Koch which
became the ‘gold standard’ for connecting an alleged causation
agent to a disease:
1. The microorganism (bacteria, fungus, virus, etc.) must be present in ev ery case of the
disease and all patients must hav e the same symptoms. It must also not be present in healthy
individuals .
2. The microorganism must be isolated from the host with the disease. If the microorganism
is a bacteria or fungus it must be grown in a pure culture. If it is a virus, it must be puriﬁed
(i.e. containing no other material except the virus particles) from a clinical sample.
3. The speciﬁc disease, with all of its characteristics, must be reproduced when the
infectious agent (the puriﬁed virus or a pure culture of bacteria or fungi) is inoculated into a
healthy , susceptible host.
4. The microorganism must be recov erable from the experimentally infected host as in step
2.
Not one  of these criteria has been met in the case of ‘SARS-Cov-2’ and
‘Covid-19’. Not ONE. EVER . Robert Koch refers to bacteria and not
viruses. What are called ‘viral particles’ are so minute (hence masks
are useless by any deﬁnition) that they could only be seen a er the
inv ention of the electron microscope in the 1930s and can still only
be observ ed through that means. American bacteriologist and
virologist Thomas Milton Riv ers, the so-called ‘Father of Modern
V irology’ who w as v ery signiﬁcantly director of the Rockefeller
Institute for Medical Research in the 1930s, dev eloped a less
stringent v ersion of Koch’ s postulates to identify ‘virus’ causation
known as ‘Riv ers criteria’. ‘Covid’ did not pass that process either .
Some ev en doubt whether any ‘virus’ can be isolated from other
particles containing genetic material in the Koch method. Freedom
of Information requests in many countries asking for scientiﬁc proof
that the ‘Covid virus’ has been puriﬁed and isolated and shown to
exist hav e all come back with a ‘w e don’ t hav e that’ and when this
happened with a request to the UK Department of Health they
added this comment:H o w e v e r ,  o u t s i d e  o f  t h e  s c o p e  o f  t h e  [ F r e e d o m  o f  I n f o r m a t i o n  A c t ]  a n d  o n  a  d i s c r e t i o n a r y
b a s i s ,  t h e  f o l l o w i n g  i n f o r m a t i o n  h a s  b e e n  a d v i s e d  t o  u s ,  w h i c h  m a y  b e  o f  i n t e r e s t .  M o s t
i n f e c t i o u s  d i s e a s e s  a r e  c a u s e d  b y  v i r u s e s ,  b a c t e r i a  o r  f u n g i .  S o m e  b a c t e r i a  o r  f u n g i  h a v e  t h e
c a p a c i t y  t o  g r o w  o n  t h e i r  o w n  i n  i s o l a t i o n ,  f o r  e x a m p l e  i n  c o l o n i e s  o n  a  p e t r i  d i s h .  V i r u s e s  a r e
d i f f e r e n t  i n  t h a t  t h e y  a r e  w h a t  w e  c a l l  ‘ o b l i g a t e  p a t h o g e n s ’  –  t h a t  i s ,  t h e y  c a n n o t  s u r v i v e  o r
r e p r o d u c e  w i t h o u t  i n f e c t i n g  a  h o s t  . . .
…  F o r  s o m e  d i s e a s e s ,  i t  i s  p o s s i b l e  t o  e s t a b l i s h  c a u s a t i o n  b e t w e e n  a  m i c r o o r g a n i s m  a n d  a
d i s e a s e  b y  i s o l a t i n g  t h e  p a t h o g e n  f r o m  a  p a t i e n t ,  g r o w i n g  i t  i n  p u r e  c u l t u r e  a n d  r e i n t r o d u c i n g
i t  t o  a  h e a l t h y  o r g a n i s m .  T h e s e  a r e  k n o w n  a s  ‘ K o c h ’ s  p o s t u l a t e s ’  a n d  w e r e  d e v e l o p e d  i n  1 8 8 2 .
H o w e v e r ,  a s  o u r  u n d e r s t a n d i n g  o f  d i s e a s e  a n d  d i f f e r e n t  d i s e a s e - c a u s i n g  a g e n t s  h a s  a d v a n c e d ,
t h e s e  a r e  n o  l o n g e r  t h e  m e t h o d  f o r  d e t e r m i n i n g  c a u s a t i o n  [ A n d r e w  K a u f m a n  a s k s  w h y  i n  t h a t
c a s e  a r e  t h e r e  t w o  p u b l i s h e d  a r t i c l e s  f a l s e l y  c l a i m i n g  t o  s a t i s f y  K o c h ’ s  p o s t u l a t e s ] .
I t  h a s  l o n g  b e e n  k n o w n  t h a t  v i r a l  d i s e a s e s  c a n n o t  b e  i d e n t i f i e d  i n  t h i s  w a y  a s  v i r u s e s  c a n n o t
b e  g r o w n  i n  ‘ p u r e  c u l t u r e ’ .  W h e n  a  p a t i e n t  i s  t e s t e d  f o r  a  v i r a l  i l l n e s s ,  t h i s  i s  n o r m a l l y  d o n e  b y
l o o k i n g  f o r  t h e  p r e s e n c e  o f  a n t i g e n s ,  o r  v i r a l  g e n e t i c  c o d e  i n  a  h o s t  w i t h  m o l e c u l a r  b i o l o g y
t e c h n i q u e s  [ K a u f m a n  a s k s  h o w  y o u  c o u l d  k n o w  t h e  o r i g i n  o f  t h e s e  c h e m i c a l s  w i t h o u t  h a v i n g
a  p u r e  c u l t u r e  f o r  c o m p a r i s o n ] .
For the record ‘antigens’ are deﬁned so:
I n v a d i n g  m i c r o o r g a n i s m s  h a v e  a n t i g e n s  o n  t h e i r  s u r f a c e  t h a t  t h e  h u m a n  b o d y  c a n  r e c o g n i s e  a s
b e i n g  f o r e i g n  –  m e a n i n g  n o t  b e l o n g i n g  t o  i t .  W h e n  t h e  b o d y  r e c o g n i s e s  a  f o r e i g n  a n t i g e n ,
l y m p h o c y t e s  ( w h i t e  b l o o d  c e l l s )  p r o d u c e  a n t i b o d i e s ,  w h i c h  a r e  c o m p l e m e n t a r y  i n  s h a p e  t o
t h e  a n t i g e n .
Notwithstanding that this is open to question in relation to ‘SARS-
Cov-2’ the presence of ‘antibodies’ can hav e many causes and they
are found in people that are perfectly w ell. Kary Mullis said:
‘ Antibodies … had alw ays been considered evidence of past disease,
not present disease.’
‘Covid’ really is a computer ‘virus’
Where the UK Department of Health statement says ‘viruses’ are
now ‘diagnosed’ through a ‘viral genetic code in a host with
molecular biology techniques’, they mean … the PCR test  which its
inv entor said cannot test for infectious disease. They hav e no
credible method of connecting a ‘virus’ to a disease and w e will see
that there is no scientiﬁc proof that any ‘virus’ causes any disease or
there is any such thing as a ‘virus’ in the w ay that it is described.
T enacious Canadian researcher Christine Massey and her team madesome 40 Freedom of Information requests to national public health
agencies in diﬀerent countries asking for proof that SARS-CoV -2 has
been isolated and not one of them could supply that information.
Massey said of her request in Canada: ‘Freedom of Information
rev eals Public Health Agency of Canada has no record of ‘SARS-
COV -2’ isolation performed by any one, anywhere, ev er .’ If y ou
accept the comment from the UK Department of Health it’ s because
they can’ t isolate a ‘virus’. Ev en so many ‘science’ papers claimed to
hav e isolated the ‘Covid virus’ until they w ere questioned and had
to admit they hadn’ t. A reply from the Robert Koch Institute in
Germany w as typical: ‘I am not aw are of a paper which puriﬁed
isolated SARS-CoV -2.’ So what the hell w as Christian Drosten and
his gang using to design the ‘Covid’ testing protocol that has
produced all the illusory Covid’ cases and ‘Covid’ deaths when the
head of the Chinese v ersion of the CDC admi ed there w as a
problem right from the start in that the ‘virus’ had nev er been
isolated/puriﬁed? Breathe deeply: What they are calling ‘Covid’ is
actually created by a computer program  i.e. they made it up  – er , that’ s
it. They took lung ﬂuid, with many sources of genetic material, from
one single person alleged to be infected with Covid-19 by a PCR test
which they claimed , without clear evidence, contained a ‘virus’. They
used sev eral computer programs to create a model of a theoretical
virus genome sequence from more than ﬁ y-six million small
sequences of RNA, each of an unknown source, assembling them
like a puzzle with no known solution. The computer ﬁlled in the
gaps with sequences from bits in the gene bank to make it look like a
bat SARS-like coronavirus! A w av e of the magic w and and poof, an
in silico (computer -generated) genome, a scientiﬁc fantasy , w as
created. UK health researcher Dr Kevin Corbe  made the same point
with this analogy:
…  I t ’ s  l i k e  g i v i n g  y o u  a  f e w  b o n e s  a n d  s a y i n g  t h a t ’ s  y o u r  f i s h .  I t  c o u l d  b e  a n y  f i s h .  N o t  e v e n  a
s k e l e t o n .  H e r e ’ s  a  f e w  f r a g m e n t s  o f  b o n e s .  T h a t ’ s  y o u r  f i s h  …  I t ’ s  a l l  f r o m  g e n e  b a n k  a n d  t h e
b i t s  o f  t h e  v i r u s  s e q u e n c e  t h a t  w e r e n ’ t  t h e r e  t h e y  m a d e  u p .
T h e y  s y n t h e t i c a l l y  c r e a t e d  t h e m  t o  f i l l  i n  t h e  b l a n k s .  T h a t ’ s  w h a t  g e n e t i c s  i s ;  i t ’ s  a  c o d e .  S o  i t ’ s
A B B B C C D D D  a n d  y o u ’ r e  m i s s i n g  s o m e  w h a t  y o u  t h i n k  i s  E E E  s o  y o u  p u t  i t  i n .  I t ’ s  a l ls y n t h e t i c .  Y o u  j u s t  m a n u f a c t u r e  t h e  b i t s  t h a t  a r e  m i s s i n g .  T h i s  i s  t h e  e n d  r e s u l t  o f  t h e
g e n e t i c i z a t i o n  o f  v i r o l o g y .  T h i s  i s  b a s i c a l l y  a  c o m p u t e r  v i r u s .
Further conﬁrmation came in an email exchange betw een British
citizen journalist Frances Leader and the gov ernment’ s Medicines &
Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (the Gates-funded MHRA)
which gav e emergency permission for untested ‘Covid v accines’ to
be used. The agency admi ed that the ‘v accine’ is not based on an
isolated ‘virus’, but comes from a computer-generated model . Frances
Leader w as naturally banned from Cult-owned fascist T wi er for
making this exchange public. The process of creating computer -
generated alleged ‘viruses’ is called ‘in silico’ or ‘in silicon’ –
computer chips – and the term ‘in silico’ is believ ed to originate with
biological experiments using only a computer in 1989. ‘V accines’
inv olv ed with ‘Covid’ are also produced ‘in silico’ or by computer
not a natural process. If the original ‘virus’ is nothing more than a
made-up computer model how can there be ‘new v ariants’ of
something that nev er existed in the ﬁrst place? They are not new
‘v ariants’; they are new computer models  only minutely diﬀerent to
the original program and designed to further terrify the population
into having the ‘v accine’ and submi ing to fascism. Y ou w ant a ‘new
v ariant’? Click, click, enter – there y ou go. T ell the medical
profession that y ou hav e discov ered a ‘South African v ariant’, ‘UK
v ariants’ or a ‘Brazilian v ariant’ and in the usual HIV -causes-AIDS
manner they will unquestioningly repeat it with no evidence
whatsoev er to support these claims. They will go on television and
w arn about the dangers of ‘new v ariants’ while doing nothing more
than repeating what they hav e been told to be true and knowing that
any deviation from that w ould be career suicide. Big-time insiders
will know it’ s a hoax, but much of the medical community is clueless
about the w ay they are being play ed and themselv es play the public
without ev en being aw are they are doing so. What an interesting
‘coincidence’ that AstraZeneca and Oxford Univ ersity w ere
conducting ‘Covid v accine trials’ in the three countries – the UK,
South Africa and Brazil – where the ﬁrst three ‘v ariants’ w ere
claimed to hav e ‘broken out’.Here’s your ‘virus’ – it’s a unicorn
Dr Andrew Kaufman presented a brilliant analysis describing how
the ‘virus’ w as imagined into fake existence when he dissected an
article published by Nature  and wri en by 19 authors detailing
alleged  ‘sequencing of a complete viral genome’ of the ‘new SARS-
CoV -2 virus’. This computer -modelled in silico  genome w as used as a
template for all subsequent genome sequencing experiments that
resulted in the so-called v ariants which he said now number more
than 6,000 . The fake genome w as constructed from more than 56
million individual short strands of RNA. Those li le pieces w ere
assembled into longer pieces by ﬁnding areas of ov erlapping
sequences. The computer programs created ov er tw o million
possible combinations from which the authors simply chose the
longest one. They then compared this to a ‘bat virus’ and the
computer ‘alignment’ rearranged the sequence and ﬁlled in the gaps!
They called this computer -generated abomination the ‘complete
genome’. Dr T om Cow an, a fellow medical author and collaborator
with Kaufman, said such computer -generation constitutes scientiﬁc
fraud and he makes this superb analogy:
H e r e  i s  a n  e q u i v a l e n c y :  A  g r o u p  o f  r e s e a r c h e r s  c l a i m  t o  h a v e  f o u n d  a  u n i c o r n  b e c a u s e  t h e y
f o u n d  a  p i e c e  o f  a  h o o f ,  a  h a i r  f r o m  a  t a i l ,  a n d  a  s n i p p e t  o f  a  h o r n .  T h e y  t h e n  a d d  t h a t
i n f o r m a t i o n  i n t o  a  c o m p u t e r  a n d  p r o g r a m  i t  t o  r e - c r e a t e  t h e  u n i c o r n ,  a n d  t h e y  t h e n  c l a i m  t h i s
c o m p u t e r  r e - c r e a t i o n  i s  t h e  r e a l  u n i c o r n .  O f  c o u r s e ,  t h e y  h a d  n e v e r  a c t u a l l y  s e e n  a  u n i c o r n  s o
c o u l d  n o t  p o s s i b l y  h a v e  e x a m i n e d  i t s  g e n e t i c  m a k e u p  t o  c o m p a r e  t h e i r  s a m p l e s  w i t h  t h e
a c t u a l  u n i c o r n ’ s  h a i r ,  h o o v e s  a n d  h o r n .
T h e  r e s e a r c h e r s  c l a i m  t h e y  d e c i d e d  w h i c h  i s  t h e  r e a l  g e n o m e  o f  S A R S - C o V - 2  b y  ‘ c o n s e n s u s ’ ,
s o r t  o f  l i k e  a  v o t e .  A g a i n ,  d i f f e r e n t  c o m p u t e r  p r o g r a m s  w i l l  c o m e  u p  w i t h  d i f f e r e n t  v e r s i o n s  o f
t h e  i m a g i n a r y  ‘ u n i c o r n ’ ,  s o  t h e y  c o m e  t o g e t h e r  a s  a  g r o u p  a n d  d e c i d e  w h i c h  i s  t h e  r e a l
i m a g i n a r y  u n i c o r n .
This is how the ‘virus’ that has transformed the w orld w as brought
into fraudulent ‘existence’. Extraordinary , y es, but as the Nazis said
the bigger the lie the more will believ e it. Cow an, how ev er , w asn’ t
ﬁnished and he w ent on to identify what he called the real
blockbuster in the paper . He quotes this section from a paper wri enby virologists and published by the CDC and then explains what it
means:
T h e r e f o r e ,  w e  e x a m i n e d  t h e  c a p a c i t y  o f  S A R S - C o V - 2  t o  i n f e c t  a n d  r e p l i c a t e  i n  s e v e r a l
c o m m o n  p r i m a t e  a n d  h u m a n  c e l l  l i n e s ,  i n c l u d i n g  h u m a n  a d e n o c a r c i n o m a  c e l l s  ( A 5 4 9 ) ,
h u m a n  l i v e r  c e l l s  ( H U H  7 . 0 ) ,  a n d  h u m a n  e m b r y o n i c  k i d n e y  c e l l s  ( H E K - 2 9 3 T ) .  I n  a d d i t i o n  t o
V e r o  E 6  a n d  V e r o  C C L 8 1  c e l l s .  . . .  E a c h  c e l l  l i n e  w a s  i n o c u l a t e d  a t  h i g h  m u l t i p l i c i t y  o f
i n f e c t i o n  a n d  e x a m i n e d  2 4 h  p o s t - i n f e c t i o n .
N o  C P E  w a s  o b s e r v e d  i n  a n y  o f  t h e  c e l l  l i n e s  e x c e p t  i n  V e r o  c e l l s ,  w h i c h  g r e w  t o  g r e a t e r  t h a n
1 0  t o  t h e  7 t h  p o w e r  a t  2 4  h  p o s t - i n f e c t i o n .  I n  c o n t r a s t ,  H U H  7 . 0  a n d  2 9 3 T  s h o w e d  o n l y
m o d e s t  v i r a l  r e p l i c a t i o n ,  a n d  A 5 4 9  c e l l s  w e r e  i n c o m p a t i b l e  w i t h  S A R S  C o V - 2  i n f e c t i o n .
Cow an explains that when virologists a empt to prov e infection
they hav e three possible ‘hosts’ or models on which they can test.
The ﬁrst w as humans. Exposure to humans w as generally not done
for ethical reasons and has nev er been done with SARS-CoV -2 or any
coronavirus. The second possible host w as animals. Cow an said that
forge ing for a moment that they nev er actually use puriﬁed virus
when exposing animals they do use solutions that they claim  contain
the virus. Exposure to animals has been done with SARS-CoV -2 in
an experiment inv olving mice and this is what they found: None of
the wild (normal) mice got sick . In a group of genetically-modiﬁed
mice, a statistically insigniﬁcant number lost w eight and had slightly
bristled fur , but they experienced nothing like the illness called
‘Covid-19’. Cow an said the third method – the one they mostly rely
on – is to inoculate solutions they say  contain the virus onto a v ariety
of tissue cultures. This process had nev er been shown to kill tissue
unless  the sample material w as starv ed of nutrients and poisoned as
part of the process . Y es, incredibly , in tissue experiments designed to
show the ‘virus’ is responsible for killing the tissue they starv e the
tissue of nutrients and add toxic drugs including antibiotics and they
do not hav e control studies to see if it’ s the starv ation and poisoning
that is degrading the tissue rather than the ‘virus’ they allege to be in
there somewhere. Y ou w ant me to pinch y ou? Y ep, I understand.
T om Cow an said this about the whole nonsensical farce as he
explains what that quote from the CDC paper really means:T h e  s h o c k i n g  t h i n g  a b o u t  t h e  a b o v e  q u o t e  i s  t h a t  u s i n g  t h e i r  o w n  m e t h o d s ,  t h e  v i r o l o g i s t s
f o u n d  t h a t  s o l u t i o n s  c o n t a i n i n g  S A R S - C o V - 2  –  e v e n  i n  h i g h  a m o u n t s  –  w e r e  N O T ,  I  r e p e a t
N O T ,  i n f e c t i v e  t o  a n y  o f  t h e  t h r e e  h u m a n  t i s s u e  c u l t u r e s  t h e y  t e s t e d .  I n  p l a i n  E n g l i s h ,  t h i s
m e a n s  t h e y  p r o v e d ,  o n  t h e i r  t e r m s ,  t h a t  t h i s  ‘ n e w  c o r o n a v i r u s ’  i s  n o t  i n f e c t i o u s  t o  h u m a n
b e i n g s .  I t  i s  O N L Y  i n f e c t i v e  t o  m o n k e y  k i d n e y  c e l l s ,  a n d  o n l y  t h e n  w h e n  y o u  a d d  t w o  p o t e n t
d r u g s  ( g e n t a m i c i n  a n d  a m p h o t e r i c i n ) ,  k n o w n  t o  b e  t o x i c  t o  k i d n e y s ,  t o  t h e  m i x .
M y  f r i e n d s ,  r e a d  t h i s  a g a i n  a n d  a g a i n .  T h e s e  v i r o l o g i s t s ,  p u b l i s h e d  b y  t h e  C D C ,  p e r f o r m e d  a
c l e a r  p r o o f ,  o n  t h e i r  t e r m s ,  s h o w i n g  t h a t  t h e  S A R S - C o V - 2  v i r u s  i s  h a r m l e s s  t o  h u m a n  b e i n g s .
T h a t  i s  t h e  o n l y  p o s s i b l e  c o n c l u s i o n ,  b u t ,  u n f o r t u n a t e l y ,  t h i s  r e s u l t  i s  n o t  e v e n  m e n t i o n e d  i n
t h e i r  c o n c l u s i o n .  T h e y  s i m p l y  s a y  t h e y  c a n  p r o v i d e  v i r u s  s t o c k s  c u l t u r e d  o n l y  o n  m o n k e y  V e r o
c e l l s ,  t h a n k s  f o r  c o m i n g .
Cow an concluded: ‘If people really understood how this “science”
w as done, I w ould hope they w ould storm the gates and demand
honesty , transparency and truth.’ Dr Michael Y eadon, former V ice
President and Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser at drug giant Pﬁzer has been a
v ocal critic of the ‘Covid v accine’ and its potential for multiple harm.
He said in an interview in April, 2021, that ‘not one [v accine] has the
virus. He w as asked why v accines normally using a ‘dead’ v ersion of
a disease to activ ate the immune system w ere not used for ‘Covid’
and instead w e had the synthetic methods of the ‘mRNA Covid
v accine’. Y eadon said that to do the former ‘y ou’ d hav e to hav e some
of [the virus] w ouldn’ t y ou?’ He added: ‘No-one’ s got any –
seriously .’ Y eadon said that surely they couldn’ t hav e fooled the
whole w orld for a y ear without having a virus, ‘but oddly enough
ask around – no one’ s got it’. He didn’ t know why with all the ‘great
labs’ around the w orld that the virus had not been isolated – ‘Maybe
they’v e been too busy running bad PCR tests and v accines that
people don’ t need.’ What is today called ‘science’ is not ‘science’ at
all. Science is no longer what is, but whatev er people can be
manipulated to believe  that it is. Real science has been hĳacked by the
Cult to dispense and produce the ‘expert scientists’ and contentions
that suit the agenda of the Cult. How big-time this has happened
with the ‘Covid’ hoax which is entirely based on fake science
deliv ered by fake ‘scientists’ and fake ‘doctors’. The human-caused
climate change hoax is also entirely based on fake science deliv ered
by fake ‘scientists’ and fake ‘climate experts’. In both cases realscientists, climate experts and doctors hav e their views suppressed
and deleted by the Cult-owned science establishment, media and
Silicon V alley . This is the ‘science’ that politicians claim to be
‘following’ and a common denominator of ‘Covid’ and climate are
Cult psychopaths Bill Gates and his mate Klaus Schw ab at the Gates-
funded W orld Economic Forum. But, don’ t w orry , it’ s all just a
coincidence and absolutely nothing to w orry about. Zzzzzzzz .
What is a ‘virus’ REALLY?
Dr T om Cow an is one of many contesting the v ery existence of
viruses let alone that they cause disease. This is understandable
when there is no scientiﬁc evidence for a disease-causing ‘virus’.
German virologist Dr Stefan Lanka w on a landmark case in 2017 in
the German Supreme Court ov er his contention that there is no such
thing as a measles virus. He had oﬀered a big prize for any one who
could prov e there is and Lanka w on his case when someone sought
to claim the money . There is currently a prize of more than 225,000
euros on oﬀer from an Isolate T ruth Fund for any one who can prov e
the isolation of SARS-CoV -2 and its genetic substance. Lanka wrote
in an article headed ‘The Misconception Called V irus’ that scientists
think a ‘virus’ is causing tissue to become diseased and degraded
when in fact it is the processes they are using  which do that – not a
‘virus’. Lanka has done an important job in making this point clear
as Cow an did in his analysis of the CDC paper . Lanka says that all
claims about viruses as disease-causing pathogens are wrong and
based on ‘easily recognisable, understandable and v eriﬁable
misinterpretations.’ Scientists believ ed they w ere w orking with
‘viruses’ in their laboratories when they w ere really w orking with
‘typical particles of speciﬁc dying tissues or cells …’ Lanka said that
the tissue decaying process claimed to be caused by a ‘virus’ still
happens when no alleged ‘virus’ is inv olv ed. It’ s the process  that does
the damage and not a ‘virus’. The genetic sample is depriv ed of
nutrients, remov ed from its energy supply through remov al from
the body and then doused in toxic antibiotics to remov e any bacteria.
He conﬁrms again that establishment scientists do not (pinch me)conduct control experiments to see if this is the case and if they did
they w ould see the claims that ‘viruses’ are doing the damage is
nonsense. He adds that during the measles ‘virus’ court case he
commissioned an independent laboratory to perform just such a
control experiment and the result w as that the tissues and cells died
in the exact same w ay as with alleged ‘infected’ material. This is
supported by a gathering number of scientists, doctors and
researchers who reject what is called ‘germ theory’ or the belief in
the body being infected by contagious sources emi ed by other
people. Researchers Dawn Lester and David P arker take the same
stance in their highly-detailed and sourced book What Really Makes
You Ill – Why everything you thought you knew about disease is wrong
which w as recommended to me by a number of medical
professionals genuinely seeking the truth. Lester and P arker say
there is no prov able scientiﬁc evidence to show that a ‘virus’ can be
transmi ed betw een people or people and animals or animals and
people:
T h e  d e f i n i t i o n  a l s o  c l a i m s  t h a t  v i r u s e s  a r e  t h e  c a u s e  o f  m a n y  d i s e a s e s ,  a s  i f  t h i s  h a s  b e e n
d e f i n i t i v e l y  p r o v e n .  B u t  t h i s  i s  n o t  t h e  c a s e ;  t h e r e  i s  n o  o r i g i n a l  s c i e n t i f i c  e v i d e n c e  t h a t
d e f i n i t i v e l y  d e m o n s t r a t e s  t h a t  a n y  v i r u s  i s  t h e  c a u s e  o f  a n y  d i s e a s e .  T h e  b u r d e n  o f  p r o o f  f o r
a n y  t h e o r y  l i e s  w i t h  t h o s e  w h o  p r o p o s e d  i t ;  b u t  n o n e  o f  t h e  e x i s t i n g  d o c u m e n t s  p r o v i d e s
‘ p r o o f ’  t h a t  s u p p o r t s  t h e  c l a i m  t h a t  ‘ v i r u s e s ’  a r e  p a t h o g e n s .
Dr T om Cow an employs one of his clev er analogies to describe the
process by which a ‘virus’ is named as the culprit for a disease when
what is called a ‘virus’ is only material released by cells detoxing
themselv es from inﬁltration by chemical or radiation poisoning. The
tidal w av e of technologically-generated radiation in the ‘smart’
modern w orld plus all the toxic food and drink are causing this to
happen more than ev er . Deluded ‘scientists’ misread this as a
gathering impact of what they wrongly label ‘viruses’.
Paper can infect houses
Cow an said in an article for davidicke.com  – with his tongue only
mildly in his cheek – that he believ ed he had made a tremendousdiscov ery that may rev olutionise science. He had discov ered that
small bits of paper are aliv e, ‘w ell aliv e-ish’, can ‘infect’ houses, and
then reproduce themselv es inside the house. The result w as that this
explosion of growth in the paper inside the house causes the house
to explode, blowing it to smithereens. His evidence for this new
theory is that in the past months he had carefully examined many of
the houses in his neighbourhood and found almost no scraps of
paper on the lawns and surrounds of the house. There w as an
occasional stray label, but nothing more. Then he w ould return to
these same houses a w eek or so later and with a few , not all of them,
particularly the old and decrepit ones, he found to his shock and
surprise they w ere li ered with stray bits of paper . He knew then
that the paper had infected these houses, made copies of itself, and
blew up the house. A y oung boy on a bicycle at one of the sites told
him he had seen a demolition crew using dynamite to explode the
house the previous w eek, but Cow an dismissed this as the idle
thoughts of silly boys because ‘I w as on to something big’. He w as
on to how ‘scientists’ mistake genetic material in the detoxifying
process for something they call a ‘virus’. Cow an said of his house
and paper story:
I f  t h i s  s o u n d s  c r a z y  t o  y o u ,  i t ’ s  b e c a u s e  i t  s h o u l d .  T h i s  s c e n a r i o  i s  o b v i o u s l y  n u t s .  B u t  c o n s i d e r
t h i s  a d m i t t e d l y  e m b e l l i s h e d ,  f o r  e f f e c t ,  c u r r e n t  v i r a l  t h e o r y  t h a t  a l l  s c i e n t i s t s ,  m e d i c a l  d o c t o r s
a n d  v i r o l o g i s t s  c u r r e n t l y  b e l i e v e .
He takes the example of the ‘nov el SARS-Cov2’ virus to prov e the
point. First they take someone with an undeﬁned illness called
‘Covid-19’ and don’ t ev en a empt to ﬁnd any virus in their sputum.
Nev er mind the scientists still describe how this ‘virus’, which they
hav e not located a aches to a cell receptor , injects its genetic
material, in ‘Covid’ s’ case, RNA, into the cell. The RNA once inserted
exploits the cell to reproduce itself and makes ‘thousands, nay
millions, of copies of itself … Then it emerges victorious to claim its
next victim’:I f  y o u  w e r e  t o  l o o k  i n  t h e  s c i e n t i f i c  l i t e r a t u r e  f o r  p r o o f ,  a c t u a l  s c i e n t i f i c  p r o o f ,  t h a t  u n i f o r m
S A R S - C o V 2  v i r u s e s  h a v e  b e e n  p r o p e r l y  i s o l a t e d  f r o m  t h e  s p u t u m  o f  a  s i c k  p e r s o n ,  t h a t  a c t u a l
s p i k e  p r o t e i n s  c o u l d  b e  s e e n  p r o t r u d i n g  f r o m  t h e  v i r u s  ( w h i c h  h a s  n o t  b e e n  f o u n d ) ,  y o u  w o u l d
f i n d  t h a t  s u c h  e v i d e n c e  d o e s n ’ t  e x i s t .
I f  y o u  g o  l o o k i n g  i n  t h e  p u b l i s h e d  s c i e n t i f i c  l i t e r a t u r e  f o r  a c t u a l  p i c t u r e s ,  p r o o f ,  t h a t  t h e s e
s p i k e  p r o t e i n s  o r  a n y  v i r a l  p r o t e i n s  a r e  e v e r  a t t a c h e d  t o  a n y  r e c e p t o r  e m b e d d e d  i n  a n y  c e l l
m e m b r a n e ,  y o u  w o u l d  a l s o  f i n d  t h a t  n o  s u c h  e v i d e n c e  e x i s t s .  I f  y o u  w e r e  t o  l o o k  f o r  a  v i d e o
o r  d o c u m e n t e d  e v i d e n c e  o f  t h e  i n t a c t  v i r u s  i n j e c t i n g  i t s  g e n e t i c  m a t e r i a l  i n t o  t h e  b o d y  o f  t h e
c e l l ,  r e p r o d u c i n g  i t s e l f  a n d  t h e n  e m e r g i n g  v i c t o r i o u s  b y  b u d d i n g  o f f  t h e  c e l l  m e m b r a n e ,  y o u
w o u l d  f i n d  t h a t  n o  s u c h  e v i d e n c e  e x i s t s .
T h e  c l o s e s t  t h i n g  y o u  w o u l d  f i n d  i s  e l e c t r o n  m i c r o g r a p h  p i c t u r e s  o f  c e l l u l a r  p a r t i c l e s ,  p o s s i b l y
a t t a c h e d  t o  c e l l  d e b r i s ,  b o t h  o f  w h i c h  t o  b e  s e e n  w e r e  s t a i n e d  b y  h e a v y  m e t a l s ,  a  p r o c e s s  t h a t
c o m p l e t e l y  d i s t o r t s  t h e i r  a r c h i t e c t u r e  w i t h i n  t h e  l i v i n g  o r g a n i s m .  T h i s  i s  l i k e  f i n d i n g  b i t s  o f
p a p e r  s t u c k  t o  t h e  b l o w n - u p  b r i c k s ,  t h e r e b y  p r o v i n g  t h e  p a p e r  e m e r g e d  b y  t a k i n g  p i e c e s  o f  t h e
b r i c k s  o n  i t s  w a y  o u t .
The Enders baloney
Cow an describes the ‘Covid’ story as being just as make-believ e as
his paper story and he charts back this fantasy to a Nobel Prize
winner called John Enders (1897-1985), an American biomedical
scientist who has been dubbed ‘The Father of Modern V accines’.
Enders is claimed to hav e ‘discov ered’ the process of the viral
culture which ‘prov ed’ that a ‘virus’ caused measles. Cow an
explains how Enders did this ‘by using the EXACT same procedure
that has been follow ed by ev ery virologist to ﬁnd and characterize
ev ery new virus since 1954’. Enders took throat sw abs from children
with measles and immersed them in 2ml of milk. P enicillin (100u/ml)
and the antibiotic streptomycin (50,g/ml) w ere added and the whole
mix w as centrifuged – rotated at high speed to separate large cellular
debris from small particles and molecules as with milk and cream,
for example. Cow an says that if the aim is to ﬁnd li le particles of
genetic material (‘viruses’) in the snot from children with measles it
w ould seem that the last thing y ou w ould do is mix the snot with
other material – milk –that also has genetic material. ‘How are y ou
ev er going to know whether whatev er y ou found came from the snot
or the milk?’ He points out that streptomycin is a ‘nephrotoxic’ or
poisonous-to-the-kidney drug. Y ou will see the relev ance of thatshortly . Cow an says that it gets w orse, much w orse, when Enders
describes the culture medium upon which the virus ‘grows’: ‘The
culture medium consisted of bovine amniotic ﬂuid (90%), beef
embry o extract (5%), horse serum (5%), antibiotics and phenol red as
an indicator of cell metabolism.’ Cow an asks incredulously: ‘Did he
just say that the culture medium also contained ﬂuids and tissues
that are themselv es rich sources of genetic material?’ The genetic
cocktail, or ‘medium’, is inoculated onto tissue and cells from rhesus
monkey kidney  tissue. This is where the importance of streptomycin
comes in and currently-used antimicrobials and other drugs that are
poisonous to kidneys  and used in ALL modern viral cultures (e.g.
gentamicin, streptomycin, and amphotericin). Cow an asks: ‘How are
y ou ev er going to know from this witch’ s brew where any genetic
material comes from as w e now hav e ﬁv e diﬀerent sources of rich
genetic material in our mix?’ Remember , he says, that all genetic
material, whether from monkey kidney tissues, bovine serum, milk,
etc., is made from the exact same components. The same central
question returns: ‘How are y ou possibly going to know that it w as
the virus that killed the kidney tissue and not the toxic antibiotic and
starv ation rations on which y ou are growing the tissue?’ John Enders
answ ered the question himself – you can’t :
A  s e c o n d  a g e n t  w a s  o b t a i n e d  f r o m  a n  u n i n o c u l a t e d  c u l t u r e  o f  m o n k e y  k i d n e y  c e l l s .  T h e
c y t o p a t h i c  c h a n g e s  [ d e a t h  o f  t h e  c e l l s ]  i t  i n d u c e d  i n  t h e  u n s t a i n e d  p r e p a r a t i o n s  c o u l d  n o t  b e
d i s t i n g u i s h e d  w i t h  c o n f i d e n c e  f r o m  t h e  v i r u s e s  i s o l a t e d  f r o m  m e a s l e s .
The death of the cells (‘cytopathic changes’) happened in exactly
the same manner , whether they inoculated the kidney tissue with the
measles snot or not, Cow an says. ‘This is evidence that the
destruction of the tissue, the v ery proof of viral causation of illness,
w as not caused by anything in the snot because they saw the same
destructiv e eﬀect when the snot w as not ev en used … the cytopathic,
i.e., cell-killing, changes come from the process of the culture itself,
not from any virus in any snot, period.’ Enders quotes in his 1957
paper a virologist called Ruckle as reporting similar ﬁndings ‘and in
addition has isolated an agent from monkey kidney tissue that is sofar indistinguishable from human measles virus’. In other w ords,
Cow an says, these particles called ‘measles viruses’ are simply and
clearly breakdown products of the starv ed and poisoned tissue. For
measles ‘virus’ see all ‘viruses’ including the so-called ‘Covid virus’.
Enders, the ‘Father of Modern V accines’, also said:
T h e r e  i s  a  p o t e n t i a l  r i s k  i n  e m p l o y i n g  c u l t u r e s  o f  p r i m a t e  c e l l s  f o r  t h e  p r o d u c t i o n  o f  v a c c i n e s
c o m p o s e d  o f  a t t e n u a t e d  v i r u s ,  s i n c e  t h e  p r e s e n c e  o f  o t h e r  a g e n t s  p o s s i b l y  l a t e n t  i n  p r i m a t e
t i s s u e s  c a n n o t  b e  d e f i n i t e l y  e x c l u d e d  b y  a n y  k n o w n  m e t h o d .
Cow an further quotes from a paper published in the journal
Viruses  in May , 2020, while the ‘Covid pandemic’ w as w ell
underw ay in the media if not in reality . ‘EVs’ here refers to particles
of genetic debris from our own tissues, such as exosomes of which
more in a moment: ‘The remarkable resemblance betw een EVs and
viruses has caused quite a few problems in the studies focused on
the analysis of EVs released during viral infections.’ Later the paper
adds that to date a reliable method that can actually guarantee a
complete separation (of EVs from viruses) DOES NOT EXIST . This
w as published at a time when a fairy tale ‘virus’ w as claimed in total
certainty to be causing a fairy tale ‘viral disease’ called ‘Covid-19’ – a
fairy tale that w as already w ell on the w ay to transforming human
society in the image that the Cult has w orked to achiev e for so long.
Cow an concludes his article:
T o  s u m m a r i z e ,  t h e r e  i s  n o  s c i e n t i f i c  e v i d e n c e  t h a t  p a t h o g e n i c  v i r u s e s  e x i s t .  W h a t  w e  t h i n k  o f
a s  ‘ v i r u s e s ’  a r e  s i m p l y  t h e  n o r m a l  b r e a k d o w n  p r o d u c t s  o f  d e a d  a n d  d y i n g  t i s s u e s  a n d  c e l l s .
W h e n  w e  a r e  w e l l ,  w e  m a k e  f e w e r  o f  t h e s e  p a r t i c l e s ;  w h e n  w e  a r e  s t a r v e d ,  p o i s o n e d ,
s u f f o c a t e d  b y  w e a r i n g  m a s k s ,  o r  a f r a i d ,  w e  m a k e  m o r e .
T h e r e  i s  n o  e n g i n e e r e d  v i r u s  c i r c u l a t i n g  a n d  m a k i n g  p e o p l e  s i c k .  P e o p l e  i n  l a b o r a t o r i e s  a l l
o v e r  t h e  w o r l d  a r e  m a k i n g  g e n e t i c a l l y  m o d i f i e d  p r o d u c t s  t o  m a k e  p e o p l e  s i c k .  T h e s e  a r e
c a l l e d  v a c c i n e s .  T h e r e  i s  n o  v i r o m e ,  n o  ‘ e c o s y s t e m ’  o f  v i r u s e s ,  v i r u s e s  a r e  n o t  8 % ,  5 0 %  o r
1 0 0  %  o f  o u r  g e n e t i c  m a t e r i a l .  T h e s e  a r e  a l l  s i m p l y  e r r o n e o u s  i d e a s  b a s e d  o n  t h e
m i s c o n c e p t i o n  c a l l e d  a  v i r u s .
What is ‘Covid’? Load of bollocksThe background described here by Cow an and Lanka w as
emphasised in the ﬁrst video presentation that I saw by Dr Andrew
Kaufman when he asked whether the ‘Covid virus’ w as in truth a
natural defence mechanism of the body called ‘exosomes’. These are
released by cells when in states of toxicity – see the same themes
returning ov er and ov er . They are released ev er more profusely as
chemical and radiation toxicity increases and think of the potential
eﬀect therefore of 5G alone as its destructiv e frequencies infest the
human energetic information ﬁeld with a gathering pace (5G w ent
online in W uhan in 2019 as the ‘virus’ emerged). I’ll hav e more about
this later . Exosomes transmit a w arning to the rest of the body that
‘Houston, w e hav e a problem’. Kaufman presented images of
exosomes and compared them with ‘Covid’ under an electron
microscope and the similarity w as remarkable. They both a ach to
the same cell receptors ( claimed  in the case of ‘Covid’), contain the
same genetic material in the form of RNA or ribonucleic acid, and
both are found in ‘viral cell cultures’ with damaged or dying cells.
James Hildreth MD, President and Chief Executiv e Oﬃcer of the
Meharry Medical College at Johns Hopkins, said: ‘The virus is fully
an exosome in ev ery sense of the w ord.’ Kaufman’ s conclusion w as
that there is no ‘virus’: ‘This entire pandemic is a completely
manufactured crisis … there is no evidence of any one dying from
[this] illness.’ Dr T om Cow an and Sally Fallon Morell, authors of The
Contagion Myth , published a statement with Dr Kaufman in
February , 2021, explaining why the ‘virus’ does not exist and y ou can
read it that in full in the Appendix.
‘V irus’ theory can be traced to the ‘cell theory’ in 1858 of German
physician Rudolf V irchow (1821-1920) who contended that disease
originates from a single cell inﬁltrated by a ‘virus’. Dr Stefan Lanka
said that ﬁndings and insights with respect to the structure, function
and central importance of tissues in the creation of life, which w ere
already known in 1858, comprehensiv ely refute the cell theory .
V irchow ignored them. W e hav e seen the part later play ed by John
Enders in the 1950s and Lanka notes that infection theories w ere
only established as a global dogma through the policies andeugenics of the Third Reich in Nazi Germany (creation of the same
Sabbatian cult behind the ‘Covid’ hoax). Lanka said: ‘Before 1933,
scientists dared to contradict this theory; a er 1933, these critical
scientists w ere silenced’. Dr T om Cow an’ s view is that ill-heath is
caused by too much of something, too li le of something, or
toxiﬁcation from chemicals and radiation – not contagion. W e must
also highlight as a major source of the ‘virus’ theology a man still
called the ‘Father of Modern V irology’ – Thomas Milton Riv ers
(1888-1962). There is no w ay giv en the Cult’ s long game policy that it
w as a coincidence for the ‘Father of Modern V irology’ to be director
of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research from 1937 to 1956
when he is credited with making the Rockefeller Institute a leader in
‘viral research’. Cult Rockefellers w ere the force behind the creation
of Big Pharma ‘medicine’, established the W orld Health
Organisation in 1948, and hav e long and close associations with the
Gates family that now runs the WHO during the pandemic hoax
through mega-rich Cult gofer and psychopath Bill Gates.
Only a Renegade Mind can see through all this bullshit by asking
the questions that need to be answ ered, not taking ‘no’ or
prev arication for an answ er , and certainly not hiding from the truth
in fear of speaking it. Renegade Minds hav e alw ays changed the
w orld for the be er and they will change this one no ma er how
bleak it may currently appear to be.ACHAPTER SIX
Sequence of deceit
If you tell the truth, you don’t have to remember anything
Mark Twain
gainst the background that I hav e laid out this far the sequence
that took us from an inv ented ‘virus’ in Cult-owned China in
late 2019 to the fascist transformation of human society can be seen
and understood in a whole new context.
W e w ere told that a deadly disease had broken out in W uhan and
the w orld media began its campaign (coordinated by behavioural
psychologists as w e shall see) to terrify the population into
unquestioning compliance. W e w ere shown images of Chinese
people collapsing in the street which nev er happened in the W est
with what w as supposed to be the same condition. In the earliest
days when alleged cases and deaths w ere few the fear register w as
hysterical in many areas of the media and this w ould expand into
the common media narrativ e across the w orld. The real story w as
rather diﬀerent, but w e w ere nev er told that. The Chinese
gov ernment, one of the Cult’ s biggest centres of global operation,
said they had discov ered a new illness with ﬂu-like and pneumonia-
type symptoms in a city with such toxic air that it is ov erwhelmed
with ﬂu-like symptoms, pneumonia and respiratory disease. Chinese
scientists said it w as a new – ‘nov el’ – coronavirus which they called
Sars-Cov-2 and that it caused a disease they labelled ‘Covid-19’.
There w as no evidence for this and the ‘virus’ has nev er to this day
been isolated, puriﬁed and its genetic code established from that. Itw as from the beginning a computer -generated ﬁction. Stories of
Chinese whistleblow ers saying the number of deaths w as being
supressed or that the ‘new disease’ w as related to the W uhan bio-lab
misdirected mainstream and alternativ e media into cul-de-sacs to
obscure the real truth – there w as no ‘virus’.
Chinese scientists took genetic material from the lung ﬂuid of just
a few people and said they had found a ‘new’ disease when this
material had a wide range of content. There w as no evidence for a
‘virus’ for the v ery reasons explained in the last tw o chapters. The
‘virus’ has nev er been shown to (a) exist and (b) cause any disease.
P eople w ere diagnosed on symptoms that are so widespread in
W uhan and polluted China and with a PCR test that can’ t detect
infectious disease. On this farce the whole global scam w as sold to
the rest of the w orld which w ould also diagnose respiratory disease
as ‘Covid-19’ from symptoms alone or with a PCR test not testing for
a ‘virus’. Flu miraculously disappeared worldwide  in 2020 and into
2021 as it w as redesignated ‘Covid-19’. It w as really the same old ﬂu
with its ‘ﬂu-like’ symptoms a ributed to ‘ﬂu-like’ ‘Covid-19’. At the
same time with v ery few exceptions the Chinese response of
draconian lockdown and fascism w as the chosen w eapon to respond
across the W est as recommended by the Cult-owned T edros at the
Cult-owned W orld Health Organization run by the Cult-owned
Gates. All w as going according to plan. Chinese scientists –
ev erything in China is controlled by the Cult-owned gov ernment –
compared their contaminated RNA lung-ﬂuid material with other
RNA sequences and said it appeared to be just under 80 percent
identical to the SARS-CoV -1 ‘virus’ claimed to be the cause of the
SARS (sev ere acute respiratory syndrome) ‘outbreak’ in 2003. They
decreed that because of this the ‘new virus’ had to be related and
they called it SARS-CoV -2. There are some serious problems with
this assumption and assumption  w as all it w as. Most ‘factual’ science
turns out to be assumptions repeated into ev ery one-knows-that. A
match of under 80-percent is meaningless. Dr Kaufman makes the
point that there’ s a 96 percent  genetic correlation betw een humans
and chimpanzees, but ‘no one w ould say our genetic material is partof the chimpanzee family’. Y et the Chinese authorities w ere claiming
that a much low er percentage, less than 80 percent, prov ed the
existence of a new ‘coronavirus’. For goodness sake human DNA is
60 percent similar to a banana .
You are feeling sleepy
The entire ‘Covid’ hoax is a global Psy op, a psychological operation
to program the human mind into believing and fearing a complete
fantasy . A crucial aspect of this w as what appeared  to happen in Italy .
It w as all v ery w ell streaming out daily images of an alleged
catastrophe in W uhan, but to the W estern mind it w as still on the
other side of the w orld in a v ery diﬀerent culture and se ing. A
reaction of ‘this could happen to me and my family’ w as still nothing
like as intense enough for the mind-doctors. The Cult needed a
W estern example to push people ov er that edge and it chose Italy ,
one of its major global locations going back to the Roman Empire.
An Italian ‘Covid’ crisis w as manufactured in a particular area called
Lombardy which just happens to be notorious for its toxic air and
therefore respiratory disease. W uhan, China, déjà vu. An hysterical
media told horror stories of Italians dying from ‘Covid’ in their
drov es and how Lombardy hospitals w ere being ov errun by a tidal
w av e of desperately ill people needing treatment a er being struck
down by the ‘deadly virus’. Here w as the psychological turning
point the Cult had planned. W ow , if this is happening in Italy , the
W estern mind concluded, this indeed could happen to me and my
family . Another point is that Italian authorities responded by
following the Chinese blueprint so v ehemently recommended by the
Cult-owned W orld Health Organization. They imposed fascistic
lockdowns on the whole country viciously policed with the help of
surv eillance drones sw eeping through the streets seeking out any one
who escaped from mass house arrest. Liv elihoods w ere destroy ed
and psychology unrav elled in the w ay w e hav e witnessed since in all
lockdown countries. Crucial to the plan w as that Italy responded in
this w ay to set the precedent of suspending freedom and imposing
fascism in a ‘W estern liberal democracy’. I emphasised in ananimated video explanation on davidicke.com  posted in the summer
of 2020 how important it w as to the Cult to expand the Chinese
lockdown model across the W est. W ithout this, and the bare-faced lie
that non-symptomatic people could still transmit a ‘disease’ they
didn’ t hav e, there w as no w ay locking down the whole population,
sick and not sick, could be pulled oﬀ. At just the right time and with
no evidence Cult operativ es and gofers claimed that people without
symptoms could pass on the ‘disease’. In the name of protecting the
‘vulnerable’ like elderly people, who lockdowns w ould kill by the
tens of thousands, w e had for the ﬁrst time healthy people told to
isolate as w ell as the sick. The great majority of people who tested
positiv e had no symptoms because there w as nothing wrong with
them. It w as just a trick made possible by a test not testing for the
‘virus’.
Months a er my animated video the Gates-funded Professor Neil
Ferguson at the Gates-funded Imperial College conﬁrmed that I w as
right. He didn’ t say it in those terms, naturally , but he did say it.
Ferguson will enter the story shortly for his outrageously crazy
‘computer models’ that led to Britain, the United States and many
other countries following the Chinese and now Italian methods of
response. Put another w ay , following the Cult script. Ferguson said
that SAGE, the UK gov ernment’ s scientiﬁc advisory group which has
controlled ‘Covid’ policy from the start, w anted to follow the
Chinese lockdown model (while they all continued to w ork and be
paid), but they w ondered if they could possibly , in Ferguson’ s
w ords, ‘get aw ay with it in Europe’. ‘Get aw ay with it’? Who the hell
do these moronic, arrogant people think they are? This appalling
man Ferguson said that once Italy w ent into national lockdown they
realised they , too, could mimic China:
I t ’ s  a  c o m m u n i s t  o n e - p a r t y  s t a t e ,  w e  s a i d .  W e  c o u l d n ’ t  g e t  a w a y  w i t h  i t  i n  E u r o p e ,  w e  t h o u g h t
…  a n d  t h e n  I t a l y  d i d  i t .  A n d  w e  r e a l i s e d  w e  c o u l d .  B e h i n d  t h i s  g a r b a g e  f r o m  F e r g u s o n  i s  a
s i m p l e  f a c t :  D o i n g  t h e  s a m e  a s  C h i n a  i n  e v e r y  c o u n t r y  w a s  t h e  p l a n  f r o m  t h e  s t a r t  a n d
F e r g u s o n ’ s  ‘ m o d e l s ’  w o u l d  p l a y  a  c e n t r a l  r o l e  i n  a c h i e v i n g  t h a t .  I t ’ s  j u s t  a  c o i n c i d e n c e ,  o f
c o u r s e ,  a n d  a b s o l u t e l y  n o t h i n g  t o  w o r r y  y o u r  l i t t l e  h e a d  a b o u t .Oops, sorry, our mistake
Once the Italian segment of the Psy op had done the job it w as
designed to do a v ery diﬀerent story emerged. Italian authorities
rev ealed that 99 percent of those who had ‘died from Covid-19’ in
Italy had one, tw o, three, or more ‘co-morbidities’ or illnesses and
health problems that could hav e ended their life. The US Centers for
Disease Control and Prev ention (CDC) published a ﬁgure of 94
percent for Americans dying of ‘Covid’ while having other serious
medical conditions – on av erage tw o to three (some ﬁv e or six) other
potential causes of death. In terms of death from an unprov en ‘virus’
I say it is 100 percent. The other one percent in Italy and six percent
in the US w ould presumably hav e died from ‘Covid’ s’ ﬂu-like
symptoms with a range of other possible causes in conjunction with
a test not testing for the ‘virus’. Fox News reported that ev en more
startling ﬁgures had emerged in one US county in which 410 of 422
deaths a ributed to ‘Covid-19’ had other potentially deadly health
conditions. The Italian National Health Institute said later that the
av erage age of people dying with a ‘Covid-19’ diagnosis in Italy w as
about 81. Ninety percent w ere ov er 70 with ten percent ov er 90. In
terms of other reasons to die some 80 percent had tw o or more
chronic diseases with half having three or more including
cardiov ascular problems, diabetes, respiratory problems and cancer .
Why is the phantom ‘Covid-19’ said to kill ov erwhelmingly old
people and hardly aﬀect the y oung? Old people continually die of
many causes and especially respiratory disease which y ou can re-
diagnose ‘Covid-19’ while y oung people die in tiny numbers by
comparison and rarely of respiratory disease. Old people ‘die of
Covid’ because they die of other things that can be redesignated
‘Covid’ and it really is that simple.
Flu has flown
The blueprint w as in place. Get y our illusory ‘cases’ from a test not
testing for the ‘virus’ and redesignate other causes of death as
‘Covid-19’. Y ou hav e an instant ‘pandemic’ from something that is
nothing more than a computer -generated ﬁction. W ith near -on abillion people having ‘ﬂu-like’ symptoms ev ery y ear the potential
w as limitless and w e can see why ﬂu quickly and apparently
miraculously disappeared worldwide  by being diagnosed ‘Covid-19’.
The painfully bloody obvious w as explained aw ay by the childlike
media in headlines like this in the UK ‘ Independent ’: ‘Not a single
case of ﬂu detected by Public Health England this y ear as Covid
restrictions suppress virus’. I kid y ou not. The masking, social
distancing and house arrest that did not make the ‘Covid virus’
disappear somehow did so with the ‘ﬂu virus’. Ev en w orse the
article, by a bloke called Samuel Lov e , suggested that maybe the
masking, sanitising and other ‘Covid’ measures should continue to
keep the ﬂu aw ay . W ith a ridiculousness that disturbs y our breathing
(it’ s ‘Covid-19’) the said Lov e  wrote: ‘W ith widespread social
distancing and mask-w earing measures in place throughout the UK,
the usual routes of transmission for inﬂuenza hav e been blocked.’
He had absolutely no evidence to support that statement, but look at
the consequences of him acknowledging the obvious. W ith ﬂu not
disappearing at all and only being relabelled ‘Covid-19’ he w ould
hav e to contemplate that ‘Covid’ w as a hoax on a scale that is hard to
imagine. Y ou need guts and commitment to truth to ev en go there
and that’ s clearly something Samuel Lov e  does not hav e in
abundance. He w ould nev er hav e got it through the editors anyw ay .
T ens of thousands die in the United States alone ev ery winter from
ﬂu including many with pneumonia complications. CDC ﬁgures
record 45 million  Americans diagnosed with ﬂu in 2017-2018 of
which 61,000 died and some reports claim 80,000. Where w as the
same hysteria then that w e hav e seen with ‘Covid-19’? Some 250,000
Americans are admi ed to hospital with pneumonia ev ery y ear with
about 50,000 cases proving fatal. About 65 million suﬀer respiratory
disease ev ery y ear and three million deaths makes this the third
biggest cause of death w orldwide. Y ou only hav e to redesignate a
portion of all these people ‘Covid-19’ and y ou hav e an instant global
pandemic or the appearance  of one. Why w ould doctors do this? They
are told to do this and all but a few dare not refuse those who must
be obey ed. Doctors in general are not researching their ownknowledge and instead take it direct and unquestioned from the
authorities that own them and their careers. The authorities say they
must now diagnose these symptoms ‘Covid-19’ and not ﬂu, or
whatev er , and they do it. Dark suits say put ‘Covid-19’ on death
certiﬁcates no ma er what the cause of death and the doctors do it.
Renegade Minds don’ t fall for the illusion that doctors and medical
staﬀ are all highly-intelligent, highly-principled, seekers of medical
truth. Some are , but not the majority . They are repeaters, gofers, and
y es sir , no sir , purv ey ors of what the system demands they purv ey .
The ‘Covid’ con is not merely conﬁned to diseases of the lungs.
Instructions to doctors to put ‘Covid-19’ on death certiﬁcates for
any one dying of anything  within 28 days (or much more) of a
positiv e test not testing for the ‘virus’ opened the ﬂoodgates. The
term dying with  ‘Covid’ and not of  ‘Covid’ w as coined to cov er the
truth. Whether it w as a with  or an of  they w ere all added to the death
numbers a ributed to the ‘deadly virus’ compiled by national
gov ernments and globally by the Gates-funded Johns Hopkins
operation in the United States that w as so inv olv ed in those
‘pandemic’ simulations. Fraudulent deaths w ere added to the ev er -
growing list of fraudulent ‘cases’ from false positiv es from a false
test. No w onder Professor W alter Ricciardi, scientiﬁc advisor to the
Italian minister of health, said a er the Lombardy hysteria had done
its job that ‘Covid’ death rates w ere due to Italy having the second
oldest population in the w orld and to how hospitals record deaths :
T h e  w a y  i n  w h i c h  w e  c o d e  d e a t h s  i n  o u r  c o u n t r y  i s  v e r y  g e n e r o u s  i n  t h e  s e n s e  t h a t  a l l  t h e
p e o p l e  w h o  d i e  i n  h o s p i t a l s  w i t h  t h e  c o r o n a v i r u s  a r e  d e e m e d  t o  b e  d y i n g  o f  t h e  c o r o n a v i r u s .
O n  r e - e v a l u a t i o n  b y  t h e  N a t i o n a l  I n s t i t u t e  o f  H e a l t h ,  o n l y  1 2  p e r  c e n t  o f  d e a t h  c e r t i f i c a t e s
h a v e  s h o w n  a  d i r e c t  c a u s a l i t y  f r o m  c o r o n a v i r u s ,  w h i l e  8 8  p e r  c e n t  o f  p a t i e n t s  w h o  h a v e  d i e d
h a v e  a t  l e a s t  o n e  p r e - m o r b i d i t y  –  m a n y  h a d  t w o  o r  t h r e e .
This is extraordinary enough when y ou consider the propaganda
campaign to use Italy to terrify the w orld, but how can they ev en say
tw elv e percent w ere genuine when the ‘virus’ has not been shown to
exist, its ‘code’ is a computer program, and diagnosis comes from a
test not testing for it? As in China, and soon the w orld, ‘Covid-19’ inItaly w as a redesignation of diagnosis. Lies and corruption w ere to
become the real ‘pandemic’ fuelled by a pathetically-compliant
medical system taking its orders from the tiny few at the top of their
national hierarchy who answ ered to the W orld Health Organization
which answ ers to Gates and the Cult. Doctors w ere told – ordered –
to diagnose a particular set of symptoms ‘Covid-19’ and put that on
the death certiﬁcate for any cause of death if the patient had tested
positiv e with a test not testing for the virus or had ‘Covid’ symptoms
like the ﬂu. The United States ev en introduced big ﬁnancial
incentiv es to manipulate the ﬁgures with hospitals receiving £4,600
from the Medicare system for diagnosing someone with regular
pneumonia, $13,000 if they made the diagnosis from the same
symptoms ‘Covid-19’ pneumonia, and $39, 000 if they put a ‘Covid’
diagnosed patient on a v entilator that w ould almost certainly kill
them. A few – painfully and pathetically few – medical
whistleblow ers rev ealed (before Cult-owned Y ouT ube deleted their
videos) that they had been instructed to ‘let the patient crash’ and
put them straight on a v entilator instead of going through a series of
far less intrusiv e and dangerous methods as they w ould hav e done
before the pandemic hoax began and the ﬁnancial incentiv es kicked
in. W e are talking cold-blooded murder giv en that v entilators are so
damaging to respiratory systems they are usually the last step before
heav en aw aits. Renegade Minds nev er fall for the belief that people
in white coats are all angels of mercy and cannot be full-on
psychopaths. I hav e explained in detail in The Answer  how what I am
describing here play ed out across the w orld coordinated by the
W orld Health Organization through the medical hierarchies in
almost ev ery country .
Medical scientist calls it
Information about the non-existence of the ‘virus’ began to emerge
for me in late March, 2020, and mushroomed a er that. I w as sent an
email by Sir Julian Rose, a writer , researcher , and organic farming
promotor , from a medical scientist friend of his in the United States.
Ev en at that early stage in March the scientist w as able to explainhow the ‘Covid’ hoax w as being manipulated. He said there w ere no
reliable tests for a speciﬁc ‘Covid-19 virus’ and nor w ere there any
reliable agencies or media outlets for reporting numbers of actual
‘Covid-19’ cases. W e hav e seen in the long period since then that he
w as absolutely right. ‘Ev ery action and reaction to Covid-19 is based
on totally ﬂaw ed data and w e simply cannot make accurate
assessments,’ he said. Most people diagnosed with ‘Covid-19’ w ere
showing nothing more than cold and ﬂu-like symptoms ‘because
most coronavirus strains are  nothing more than cold/ﬂu-like
symptoms’. W e had farcical situations like an 84-y ear -old German
man testing positiv e for ‘Covid-19’ and his nursing home ordered to
quarantine only for him to be found to hav e a common cold. The
scientist described back then why PCR tests and what he called the
‘Mickey Mouse test kits’ w ere useless for what they w ere claimed to
be identifying. ‘The idea these kits can isolate a speciﬁc virus like
Covid-19 is nonsense,’ he said. Signiﬁcantly , he pointed out that ‘if
y ou w ant to create a totally false panic about a totally false pandemic
– pick a coronavirus’. This is exactly what the Cult-owned Gates,
W orld Economic Forum and Johns Hopkins Univ ersity did with
their Ev ent 201 ‘simulation’ follow ed by their real-life simulation
called the ‘pandemic’. The scientist said that all y ou had to do w as
select the sickest of people with respiratory-type diseases in a single
location – ‘say W uhan’ – and administer PCR tests to them. Y ou can
then claim that any one showing ‘viral sequences’ similar to a
coronavirus ‘which will inevitably be quite a few’ is suﬀering from a
‘new’ disease:
S i n c e  y o u  a l r e a d y  s e l e c t e d  t h e  s i c k e s t  f l u  c a s e s  a  f a i r l y  h i g h  p r o p o r t i o n  o f  y o u r  s a m p l e  w i l l  g o
o n  t o  d i e .  Y o u  c a n  t h e n  s a y  t h i s  ‘ n e w ’  v i r u s  h a s  a  C F R  [ c a s e  f a t a l i t y  r a t e ]  h i g h e r  t h a n  t h e  f l u
a n d  u s e  t h i s  t o  i n f u s e  m o r e  c o n c e r n  a n d  d o  m o r e  t e s t s  w h i c h  w i l l  o f  c o u r s e  p r o d u c e  m o r e
‘ c a s e s ’ ,  w h i c h  e x p a n d s  t h e  t e s t i n g ,  w h i c h  p r o d u c e s  y e t  m o r e  ‘ c a s e s ’  a n d  s o  o n  a n d  s o  o n .
B e f o r e  l o n g  y o u  h a v e  y o u r  ‘ p a n d e m i c ’ ,  a n d  a l l  y o u  h a v e  d o n e  i s  u s e  a  s i m p l e  t e s t  k i t  t r i c k  t o
c o n v e r t  t h e  w o r s t  f l u  a n d  p n e u m o n i a  c a s e s  i n t o  s o m e t h i n g  n e w  t h a t  d o e s n ’ t  A C T U A L L Y  E X I S T
[ m y  e m p h a s i s ] .
He said that y ou then ‘just run the same scam in other countries’
and make sure to keep the fear message running high ‘so that people•
•
•will feel panicky and less able to think critically’. The only problem
to ov ercome w as the fact there is no  actual new deadly pathogen and
only regular sick people. This meant that deaths from the ‘new
deadly pathogen’ w ere going to be w ay too low for a real new
deadly virus pandemic, but he said this could be ov ercome in the
following w ays – all of which w ould go on to happen:
1. Y ou can claim this is just the beginning and more deaths are imminent [y ou underpin this
with fantasy ‘computer projections’]. Use this as an excuse to quarantine ev ery one and then
claim the quarantine prev ented the expected millions of dead.
2. Y ou can [say that people] ‘minimizing’ the dangers are irresponsible and bully them into
not talking about numbers.
3. Y ou can talk crap about made up numbers hoping to blind people with pseudoscience.
4. Y ou can start testing w ell people (who, of course, will also likely hav e shreds of
coronavirus [RNA] in them) and thus inﬂate y our ‘case ﬁgures’ with ‘asymptomatic
carriers’ (y ou will of course hav e to spin that to sound deadly ev en though any virologist
knows the more symptom-less cases y ou hav e the less deadly is y our pathogen).
The scientist said that if y ou take these simple steps ‘y ou can hav e
y our own entirely manufactured pandemic up and running in
w eeks’. His analysis made so early in the hoax w as brilliantly
prophetic of what w ould actually unfold. Pulling all the information
together in these recent chapters w e hav e this is simple 1, 2, 3, of
how y ou can delude virtually the entire human population into
believing in a ‘virus’ that doesn’ t exist:
 
A ‘Covid case’ is someone who tests positiv e with a test not
testing for the ‘virus’.
 
A ‘Covid death’ is someone who dies of any cause  within 28 days
(or much longer) of testing positiv e with a test not testing for the
‘virus.
 
Asymptomatic means there is nothing wrong with y ou, but they
claim y ou can pass on what y ou don’ t hav e to justify lockingdown (quarantining) healthy people in totality .
 
The foundations of the hoax are that simple. A study inv olving ten
million people in W uhan, published in Nov ember , 2020, demolished
the whole lie about those without symptoms passing on the ‘virus’.
They found ‘300 asymptomatic cases’ and traced their contacts to
ﬁnd that not one of them w as detected with the ‘virus’.
‘ Asymptomatic’ patients and their contacts w ere isolated for no less
than tw o w eeks and nothing changed. I know it’ s all crap, but if y ou
are going to claim that those without symptoms can transmit ‘the
virus’ then y ou must produce evidence for that and they nev er hav e.
Ev en W orld Health Organization oﬃcial Dr Maria V an Kerkhov e,
head of the emerging diseases and zoonosis unit, said as early as
June, 2020, that she doubted the v alidity of asymptomatic
transmission. She said that ‘from the data w e hav e, it still seems to
be rare that an asymptomatic person actually transmits onw ard to a
secondary individual’ and by ‘rare’ she meant that she couldn’ t cite
any case of asymptomatic transmission.
The Ferguson factor
The problem for the Cult as it headed into March, 2020, when the
script had lockdown due to start, w as that despite all the
manipulation of the case and death ﬁgures they still did not hav e
enough people alleged to hav e died from ‘Covid’ to justify mass
house arrest. This w as ov ercome in the w ay the scientist described:
‘Y ou can claim this is just the beginning and more deaths are
imminent … Use this as an excuse to quarantine ev ery one and then
claim the quarantine prev ented the expected millions of dead.’ Enter
one Professor Neil Ferguson, the Gates-funded ‘epidemiologist’ at
the Gates-funded Imperial College in London. Ferguson is Britain’ s
Christian Drosten in that he has a dire record of predicting health
outcomes, but is still called upon to advise gov ernment on the next
health outcome when another ‘crisis’ comes along. This may seem to
be a strange and ridiculous thing to do. Why w ould y ou keep
turning for policy guidance to people who hav e a history of beingmonumentally wrong? Ah, but it makes sense from the Cult point of
view . These ‘experts’ keep on producing predictions that suit the
Cult agenda for societal transformation and so it w as with Neil
Ferguson as he rev ealed his horriﬁc (and clearly insane) computer
model predictions that allow ed lockdowns to be imposed in Britain,
the United States and many other countries. Ferguson does not hav e
ev en an A-lev el in biology and w ould appear to hav e no formal
training in computer modelling, medicine or epidemiology ,
according to Derek W inton, an MSc in Computational Intelligence.
He wrote an article somewhat aghast at what Ferguson did which
included taking no account of respiratory disease ‘seasonality’ which
means it is far w orse in the winter months. Who w ould hav e thought
that respiratory disease could be w orse in the winter? W ell, certainly
not Ferguson.
The massiv ely China-connected Imperial College and its bizarre
professor provided the excuse for the long-incubated Chinese model
of human control to trav el w estw ard at lightning speed. Imperial
College conﬁrms on its w ebsite that it collaborates with the Chinese
Research Institute; publishes more than 600 research papers ev ery
y ear with Chinese research institutions; has 225 Chinese staﬀ; 2,600
Chinese students – the biggest international group; 7,000 former
students living in China which is the largest group outside the UK;
and w as selected for a tour by China’ s President Xi Jinping during
his state visit to the UK in 2015. The college takes major donations
from China and describes itself as the UK’ s number one univ ersity
collaborator with Chinese research institutions. The China
communist/fascist gov ernment did not appear phased by the w oeful
predictions of Ferguson and Imperial when during the lockdown
that Ferguson induced the college signed a ﬁv e-y ear collaboration
deal with China tech giant Huaw ei that will hav e Huaw ei’ s indoor
5G netw ork equipment installed at the college’ s W est London tech
campus along with an ‘ AI cloud platform’. The deal includes Chinese
sponsorship of Imperial’ s V enture Catalyst entrepreneurship
competition. Imperial is an example of the enormous inﬂuence the
Chinese gov ernment has within British and North Americanuniv ersities and research centres – and further aﬁeld. Up to 200
academics from more than a dozen UK univ ersities are being
inv estigated on suspicion of ‘unintentionally’ helping the Chinese
gov ernment build w eapons of mass destruction by ‘transferring
w orld-leading research in adv anced military technology such as
aircra , missile designs and cyberw eapons’. Similar scandals hav e
broken in the United States, but it’ s all a coincidence. Imperial
College serv es the agenda in many other w ays including the
promotion of ev ery aspect of the United Nations Agenda 21/2030
(the Great Reset) and produced computer models to show that
human-caused ‘climate change’ is happening when in the real w orld
it isn’ t. Imperial College is driving the climate agenda as it driv es the
‘Covid’ agenda (both Cult hoaxes) while P atrick V allance, the UK
gov ernment’ s Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser on ‘Covid’, w as named Chief
Scientiﬁc Adviser to the UN ‘climate change’ conference known as
COP26 hosted by the gov ernment in Glasgow , Scotland. ‘Covid’ and
‘climate’ are fundamentally connected.
Professor Woeful
From Imperial’ s bosom came Neil Ferguson still advising
gov ernment despite his previous disasters and it w as announced
early on that he and other key people like UK Chief Medical Adviser
Chris Whi y had caught the ‘virus’ as the propaganda story w as
being sold. Somehow they managed to surviv e and w e had Prime
Minister Boris Johnson admi ed to hospital with what w as said to be
a sev ere v ersion of the ‘virus’ in this same period. His whole policy
and demeanour changed when he returned to Downing Street. It’ s a
small w orld with these gov ernment advisors – especially in their
communal connections to Gates – and Ferguson had partnered with
Whi y to write a paper called ‘Infectious disease: T ough choices to
reduce Ebola transmission’ which inv olv ed another scare-story that
didn’ t happen. Ferguson’ s ‘models’ predicted that up to150, 000
could die from ‘mad cow disease’, or BSE, and its v ersion in sheep if
it w as transmi ed to humans. BSE w as not transmi ed and instead
triggered by an organophosphate pesticide used to treat a pest oncows. Few er than 200 deaths follow ed from the human form. Models
by Ferguson and his fellow incompetents led to the unnecessary
culling of millions of pigs, ca le and sheep in the foot and mouth
outbreak in 2001 which destroy ed the liv es and liv elihoods of
farmers and their families who had o en spent decades building
their herds and ﬂocks. V ast numbers of these animals did not hav e
foot and mouth and had no contact with the infection. Another
‘expert’ behind the cull w as Professor Roy Anderson, a computer
modeller at Imperial College specialising in the epidemiology of
human , not animal, disease. Anderson has serv ed on the Bill and
Melinda Gates Grand Challenges in Global Health advisory board
and chairs another Gates-funded organisation. Gates is ev erywhere.
In a precursor to the ‘Covid’ script Ferguson backed closing
schools ‘for prolonged periods’ ov er the swine ﬂu ‘pandemic’ in 2009
and said it w ould aﬀect a third of the w orld population if it
continued to spread at the speed he claimed to be happening. His
mates at Imperial College said much the same and a news report
said: ‘One of the authors, the epidemiologist and disease modeller
Neil Ferguson, who sits on the W orld Health Organisation’ s
emergency commi ee for the outbreak, said the virus had “full
pandemic potential”.’ Professor Liam Donaldson, the Chris Whi y
of his day as Chief Medical Oﬃcer , said the w orst case could see 30
percent of the British people infected by swine ﬂu with 65,000 dying.
Ferguson and Donaldson w ere indeed prov ed correct when at the
end of the y ear the number of deaths a ributed to swine ﬂu w as 392.
The term ‘expert’ is rather liberally applied unfortunately , not least
to complete idiots. Swine ﬂu ‘projections’ w ere great for
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) as millions rolled in for its P andemrix
inﬂuenza v accine which led to brain damage with children most
aﬀected. The British gov ernment (taxpay ers) paid out more than £60
million in compensation a er GSK w as giv en immunity from
prosecution. Y et another ‘Covid’ déjà vu. Swine ﬂu w as supposed to
hav e broken out in Mexico, but Dr W olfgang W odarg, a German
doctor , former member of parliament and critic of the ‘Covid’ hoax,
observ ed ‘the spread of swine ﬂu’ in Mexico City at the time. Hesaid: ‘What w e experienced in Mexico City w as a v ery mild ﬂu
which did not kill more than usual – which killed ev en few er people
than usual.’ Hyping the fear against all the facts is not unique to
‘Covid’ and has happened many times before. Ferguson is reported
to hav e ov er -estimated the projected death toll of bird ﬂu (H5N1) by
some three million-fold, but bird ﬂu v accine makers again made a
killing from the scare. This is some of the background to the Neil
Ferguson who produced the perfectly-timed computer models in
early 2020 predicting that half a million people w ould die in Britain
without draconian lockdown and 2.2 million in the United States.
P oliticians panicked, people panicked, and lockdowns of alleged
short duration w ere instigated to ‘ﬂa en the curv e’ of cases gleaned
from a test not testing for the ‘virus’. I said at the time that the public
could forget the ‘short duration’ bit. This w as an agenda to destroy
the liv elihoods of the population and force them into mass control
through dependency and there w as going to be nothing ‘short’ about
it. American researcher Daniel Horowitz described the consequences
of the ‘models’ spew ed out by Gates-funded Ferguson and Imperial
College:
W h a t  l e d  o u r  g o v e r n m e n t  a n d  t h e  g o v e r n m e n t s  o f  m a n y  o t h e r  c o u n t r i e s  i n t o  p a n i c  w a s  a
s i n g l e  I m p e r i a l  C o l l e g e  o f  U K  s t u d y ,  f u n d e d  b y  g l o b a l  w a r m i n g  a c t i v i s t s ,  t h a t  p r e d i c t e d  2 . 2
m i l l i o n  d e a t h s  i f  w e  d i d n ’ t  l o c k  d o w n  t h e  c o u n t r y .  I n  a d d i t i o n ,  t h e  r e p o r t e d  8 - 9 %  d e a t h  r a t e  i n
I t a l y  s c a r e d  u s  i n t o  t h i n k i n g  t h e r e  w a s  s o m e  o t h e r  m u t a t i o n  o f  t h i s  v i r u s  t h a t  t h e y  g o t ,  w h i c h
m i g h t  h a v e  c o m e  h e r e .
T o g e t h e r  w i t h  t h e  f a c t  t h a t  w e  w e r e  f i n a l l y  t e s t i n g  a n d  h a d  t h e  a b i l i t y  t o  a c t u a l l y  r e p o r t  n e w
c a s e s ,  w e  t h o u g h t  w e  w e r e  h e a d e d  f o r  a  d e a t h  s p i r a l .  B u t  a g a i n  …  w e  c a n ’ t  f l a t t e n  a  c u r v e  i f
w e  d o n ’ t  k n o w  w h e n  t h e  c u r v e  s t a r t e d .
How about it never  started?
Giving them what they want
An inv estigation by German news outlet Welt Am Sonntag (World on
Sunday)  rev ealed how in March, 2020, the German gov ernment
gathered together ‘leading scientists from sev eral research institutes
and univ ersities’ and ‘together , they w ere to produce a [modelling]paper that w ould serv e as legitimization for further tough political
measures’. The Cult agenda w as justiﬁed by computer modelling not
based on evidence or reality; it w as speciﬁcally constructed to justify
the Cult demand for lockdowns all ov er the w orld to destroy the
independent liv elihoods of the global population. All these
modellers and ev ery one responsible for the ‘Covid’ hoax hav e a date
with a trial like those in Nuremberg a er W orld W ar T w o when
Nazis faced the consequences of their w ar crimes. These corrupt-
bey ond-belief ‘modellers’ wrote the paper according to gov ernment
instructions and it said that that if lockdown measures w ere li ed
then up to one million Germans w ould die from ‘Covid-19’ adding
that some w ould die ‘agonizingly at home, gasping for breath’
unable to be treated by hospitals that couldn’ t cope. All lies. No
ma er – it gav e the Cult all that it w anted. What did long-time
gov ernment ‘modeller ’ Neil Ferguson say? If the UK and the United
States didn’ t lockdown half a million w ould die in Britain and 2.2
million Americans. Any one see a theme here? ‘Modellers’ are such a
crucial part of the lockdown strategy that w e should look into their
background and follow the money . Researcher Rosemary Frei
produced an excellent article headlined ‘The Modelling-paper
Maﬁosi’. She highlights a guy called John Edmunds, a British
epidemiologist, and professor in the Faculty of Epidemiology and
P opulation Health at the London School of Hygiene & T ropical
Medicine. He studied at Imperial College. Edmunds is a member of
gov ernment ‘Covid’ advisory bodies which hav e been dictating
policy , the New and Emerging Respiratory V irus Threats Advisory
Group (NER VT AG) and the Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for
Emergencies (SAGE).
Ferguson, another member of NER VT AG and SAGE, led the w ay
with the original ‘virus’ and Edmunds has follow ed in the ‘v ariant’
stage and especially the so-called UK or Kent v ariant known as the
‘V ariant of Concern’ (VOC) B.1.1.7. He said in a co-wri en report for
the Centre for Mathematical modelling of Infectious Diseases at the
London School of Hygiene and T ropical Medicine, with input from
the Centre’ s ‘Covid-19’ W orking Group, that there w as ‘a realisticpossibility that VOC B.1.1.7 is associated with an increased risk of
death compared to non- VOC viruses’. Fear , fear , fear , get the
v accine, fear , fear , fear , get the v accine. Rosemary Frei rev eals that
almost all the paper ’ s authors and members of the modelling centre’ s
‘Covid-19’ W orking Group receiv e funding from the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation and/or the associated Gates-funded
W ellcome T rust. The paper w as published by e-journal Medr  χiv
which only publishes papers not peer -review ed and the journal w as
established by an organisation headed by Facebook’ s Mark
Zuckerberg and his missus. What a small w orld it is. Frei discov ered
that Edmunds is on the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board of the Coalition for
Epidemic Preparedness Innov ations (CEPI) which w as established
by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Klaus Schw ab’ s Dav os
W orld Economic Forum and Big Pharma giant W ellcome. CEPI w as
‘launched in Dav os [in 2017] to dev elop v accines to stop future
epidemics’, according to its w ebsite. ‘Our mission is to accelerate the
dev elopment of v accines against emerging infectious diseases and
enable equitable access to these v accines for people during
outbreaks.’ What kind people they are. Rosemary Frei rev eals that
Public Health England (PHE) director Susan Hopkins is an author of
her organisation’ s non-peer -review ed reports on ‘new v ariants’.
Hopkins is a professor of infectious diseases at London’ s Imperial
College which is gi ed tens of millions of dollars a y ear by the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation. Gates-funded modelling disaster
Neil Ferguson also co-authors Public Health England reports and he
spoke in December , 2020, about the potential danger of the B.1.1.7.
‘UK v ariant’ promoted by Gates-funded modeller John Edmunds.
When I come to the ‘Covid v accines’ the ‘new v ariants’ will be
shown for what they are – bollocks.
Connections, connections
All these people and modellers are lockdown-obsessed or , put
another w ay , they demand what the Cult demands. Edmunds said in
January , 2021, that to ease lockdowns too soon w ould be a disaster
and they had to ‘v accinate much, much, much more widely than theelderly’. Rosemary Frei highlights that Edmunds is married to
Jeanne Pimenta who is described in a LinkedIn proﬁle as director of
epidemiology at GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) and she held shares in the
company . P atrick V allance, co-chair of SAGE and the gov ernment’ s
Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser , is a former executiv e of GSK and has a
deferred bonus of shares in the company w orth £600,000. GSK has
serious business connections with Bill Gates and is collaborating
with mRNA-’v accine’ company CureV ac to make ‘v accines’ for the
new v ariants that Edmunds is talking about. GSK is planning a
‘Covid v accine’ with drug giant Sanoﬁ. Puppet Prime Minister Boris
Johnson announced in the spring of 2021 that up to 60 million
v accine doses w ere to be made at the GSK facility at Barnard Castle
in the English North East. Barnard Castle, with a population of just
6,000, w as famously visited in breach of lockdown rules in April,
2020, by Johnson aide Dominic Cummings who said that he drov e
there ‘to test his ey esight’ before driving back to London. Cummings
w ould be be er advised to test his integrity – not that it w ould take
long. The GSK facility had nothing to do with his visit then although
I’ m sure P atrick V allance w ould hav e been happy to arrange an
introduction and some tea and biscuits. Ruthless psychopath Gates
has made y et another fortune from v accines in collaboration with Big
Pharma companies and gushes at the phenomenal proﬁts to be made
from v accines – more than a 20-to-1 return as he told one
interview er . Gates also tw eeted in December , 2019, with the
foreknowledge of what w as coming: ‘What’ s next for our
foundation? I’ m particularly excited about what the next y ear could
mean for one of the best buys in global health: v accines.’
Modeller John Edmunds is a big promotor of v accines as all these
people appear to be. He’ s the dean of the London School of Hygiene
& T ropical Medicine’ s Faculty of Epidemiology and P opulation
Health which is primarily funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation and the Gates-established and funded GA VI v accine
alliance which is the Gates v ehicle to v accinate the w orld. The
organisation Doctors W ithout Borders has described GA VI as being
‘aimed more at supporting drug-industry desires to promote newproducts than at ﬁnding the most eﬃcient and sustainable means for
ﬁghting the diseases of pov erty’. But then that’ s why the psychopath
Gates created it. John Edmunds said in a video that the London
School of Hygiene & T ropical Medicine is inv olv ed in ev ery aspect of
v accine dev elopment including large-scale clinical trials. He
contends that mathematical modelling can show that v accines
protect individuals and society . That’ s on the basis of shit in and shit
out, I take it. Edmunds serv es on the UK V accine Netw ork as does
Ferguson and the gov ernment’ s foremost ‘Covid’ adviser , the grim-
faced, dark-ey ed Chris Whi y . The V accine Netw ork says it w orks
‘to support the gov ernment to identify and shortlist targeted
inv estment opportunities for the most promising v accines and
v accine technologies that will help combat infectious diseases with
epidemic potential, and to address structural issues related to the
UK’ s broader v accine infrastructure’. Ferguson is acting Director of
the Imperial College V accine Impact Modelling Consortium which
has funding from the Bill and Melina Gates Foundation and the
Gates-created GA VI ‘v accine alliance’. Any one w onder why these
characters see v accines as the answ er to ev ery problem? Ferguson is
wildly enthusiastic in his support for GA VI’ s campaign to v accine
children en masse in poor countries. Y ou w ould expect someone like
Gates who has constantly talked about the need to reduce the
population to w ant to fund v accines to keep more people aliv e. I’ m
sure that’ s why he does it. The John Edmunds London School of
Hygiene & T ropical Medicine (LSHTM) has a V accines
Manufacturing Innov ation Centre which dev elops, tests and
commercialises v accines. Rosemary Frei writes:
T h e  v a c c i n e s  c e n t r e  a l s o  p e r f o r m s  a f f i l i a t e d  a c t i v i t i e s  l i k e  c o m b a t i n g  ‘ v a c c i n e  h e s i t a n c y ’ .  T h e
l a t t e r  i n c l u d e s  t h e  V a c c i n e  C o n f i d e n c e  P r o j e c t .  T h e  p r o j e c t ’ s  s t a t e d  p u r p o s e  i s ,  a m o n g  o t h e r
t h i n g s ,  ‘ t o  p r o v i d e  a n a l y s i s  a n d  g u i d a n c e  f o r  e a r l y  r e s p o n s e  a n d  e n g a g e m e n t  w i t h  t h e  p u b l i c
t o  e n s u r e  s u s t a i n e d  c o n f i d e n c e  i n  v a c c i n e s  a n d  i m m u n i s a t i o n ’ .  T h e  V a c c i n e  C o n f i d e n c e
P r o j e c t ’ s  d i r e c t o r  i s  L S H T M  p r o f e s s o r  H e i d i  L a r s o n .  F o r  m o r e  t h a n  a  d e c a d e  s h e ’ s  b e e n
r e s e a r c h i n g  h o w  t o  c o m b a t  v a c c i n e  h e s i t a n c y .
How the bloody hell can blokes like John Edmunds and Neil
Ferguson with those connections and ﬁnancial ties model ‘virus’ caseand death projections for the gov ernment and especially in a w ay
that giv es their paymasters like Gates exactly what they w ant? It’ s
insane, but this is what y ou ﬁnd throughout the w orld.
‘Covid’ is not dangerous, oops, wait, yes it is
Only days before Ferguson’ s nightmare scenario made Jackboot
Johnson take Britain into a China-style lockdown to sav e us from a
deadly ‘virus’ the UK gov ernment w ebsite gov .uk w as reporting
something v ery diﬀerent to Ferguson on a page of oﬃcial
gov ernment guidance for ‘high consequence infectious diseases
(HCID)’. It said this about ‘Covid-19’:
A s  o f  1 9  M a r c h  2 0 2 0 ,  C O V I D - 1 9  is no longer considered to be a high consequence infectious
diseases (HCID) in the UK  [ m y  e m p h a s i s ] .  T h e  4  n a t i o n s  p u b l i c  h e a l t h  H C I D  g r o u p  m a d e  a n
i n t e r i m  r e c o m m e n d a t i o n  i n  J a n u a r y  2 0 2 0  t o  c l a s s i f y  C O V I D - 1 9  a s  a n  H C I D .  T h i s  w a s  b a s e d
o n  c o n s i d e r a t i o n  o f  t h e  U K  H C I D  c r i t e r i a  a b o u t  t h e  v i r u s  a n d  t h e  d i s e a s e  w i t h  i n f o r m a t i o n
a v a i l a b l e  d u r i n g  t h e  e a r l y  s t a g e s  o f  t h e  o u t b r e a k .
N o w  t h a t  m o r e  i s  k n o w n  a b o u t  C O V I D - 1 9 ,  t h e  p u b l i c  h e a l t h  b o d i e s  i n  t h e  U K  h a v e  r e v i e w e d
t h e  m o s t  u p  t o  d a t e  i n f o r m a t i o n  a b o u t  C O V I D - 1 9  a g a i n s t  t h e  U K  H C I D  c r i t e r i a .  T h e y  h a v e
d e t e r m i n e d  t h a t  s e v e r a l  f e a t u r e s  h a v e  n o w  c h a n g e d ;  i n  p a r t i c u l a r ,  m o r e  i n f o r m a t i o n  i s
a v a i l a b l e  a b o u t  m o r t a l i t y  r a t e s  ( l o w  o v e r a l l ) ,  a n d  t h e r e  i s  n o w  g r e a t e r  c l i n i c a l  a w a r e n e s s  a n d  a
s p e c i f i c  a n d  s e n s i t i v e  l a b o r a t o r y  t e s t ,  t h e  a v a i l a b i l i t y  o f  w h i c h  c o n t i n u e s  t o  i n c r e a s e .  T h e
A d v i s o r y  C o m m i t t e e  o n  D a n g e r o u s  P a t h o g e n s  ( A C D P )  i s  a l s o  o f  t h e  o p i n i o n  t h a t  C O V I D - 1 9
s h o u l d  n o  l o n g e r  b e  c l a s s i f i e d  a s  a n  H C I D .
Soon a er the gov ernment had been exposed for downgrading the
risk they upgraded it again and ev ery one w as back to singing from
the same Cult hymn book. Ferguson and his fellow Gates clones
indicated that lockdowns and restrictions w ould hav e to continue
until a Gates-funded v accine w as dev eloped. Gates said the same
because Ferguson and his like w ere repeating the Gates script which
is the Cult script. ‘Fla en the curv e’ became an ongoing nightmare of
continuing lockdowns with periods in betw een of sev ere restrictions
in pursuit of destroying independent incomes and had nothing to do
with protecting health about which the Cult giv es not a shit. Why
w ouldn’ t Ferguson be pushing a v accine ‘solution’ when he’ s owned
by v accine-obsessiv e Gates who makes a fortune from them andwhen Ferguson heads the V accine Impact Modelling Consortium at
Imperial College funded by the Gates Foundation and GA VI, the
‘v accine alliance’, created by Gates as his personal v accine
promotion operation? T o compound the human catastrophe that
Ferguson’ s ‘models’ did so much to create he w as later exposed for
breaking his own lockdown rules by having sexual liaisons with his
married girlfriend Antonia Staats at his home while she w as living at
another location with her husband and children. Staats w as a
‘climate’ activist and senior campaigner at the Soros-funded A v aaz
which I w ouldn’ t trust to tell me that grass is green. Ferguson had to
resign as a gov ernment advisor ov er this hypocrisy in May , 2020, but
a er a period of quiet he w as back being quoted by the ridiculous
media on the need for more lockdowns and a v accine rollout. Other
gov ernment-advising ‘scientists’ from Imperial College’ held the fort
in his absence and said lockdown could be indeﬁnite until a v accine
w as found. The Cult script w as being sung by the payrolled choir . I
said there w as no intention of going back to ‘normal’ when the
‘v accine’ came because the ‘v accine’ is part of a v ery diﬀerent agenda
that I will discuss in Human 2.0. Why w ould the Cult w ant to let the
w orld go back to normal when destroying that normal forev er w as
the whole point of what w as happening? House arrest, closing
businesses and schools through lockdown, (un)social distancing and
masks all follow ed the Ferguson fantasy models. Again as I
predicted (these people are so predictable) when the ‘v accine’
arriv ed w e w ere told that house arrest, lockdown, (un)social
distancing and masks w ould still hav e to continue. I will deal with
the masks in the next chapter because they are of fundamental
importance.
Where’s the ‘pandemic’?
Any mildly in-depth assessment of the ﬁgures rev ealed what w as
really going on. Cult-funded and controlled organisations still hav e
genuine people w orking within them such is the number inv olv ed.
So it is with Geneviev e Briand, assistant program director of the
Applied Economics master ’ s degree program at Johns HopkinsUniv ersity . She analysed the impact that ‘Covid-19’ had on deaths
from all  causes in the United States using oﬃcial data from the CDC
for the period from early February to early September , 2020. She
found that allegedly ‘Covid’ related -deaths exceeded those from
heart disease which she found strange with heart disease alw ays the
biggest cause of fatalities. Her research became ev en more signiﬁcant
when she noted the sudden decline in 2020 of all  non-’Covid’ deaths:
‘This trend is completely contrary to the pa ern observ ed in all
previous y ears … the total decrease in deaths by other causes almost
exactly equals the increase in deaths by Covid-19.’ This w as such a
game, set and match in terms of what w as happening that Johns
Hopkins Univ ersity deleted the article on the grounds that it ‘w as
being used to support false and dangerous inaccuracies about the
impact of the pandemic’. No – because it exposed the scam from
oﬃcial CDC ﬁgures and this w as conﬁrmed when those ﬁgures w ere
published in January , 2021. Here w e can see the eﬀect of people
dying from heart a acks, cancer , road accidents and gunshot
w ounds – anything  – having ‘Covid-19’ on the death certiﬁcate along
with those diagnosed from ‘symptoms’ who had ev en not tested
positiv e with a test not testing for the ‘virus’. I am not kidding with
the gunshot w ounds, by the w ay . Brenda Bock, coroner in Grand
County , Colorado, rev ealed that tw o gunshot victims tested positiv e
for the ‘virus’ within the previous 30 days and w ere therefore
classiﬁed as ‘Covid deaths’. Bock said: ‘These tw o people had tested
positiv e for Covid, but that’ s not what killed them. A gunshot
w ound is what killed them.’ She said she had not ev en ﬁnished her
inv estigation when the state listed the gunshot victims as deaths due
to the ‘virus’. The death and case ﬁgures for ‘Covid-19’ are an
absolute joke and y et they are repeated like parrots by the media,
politicians and alleged medical ‘experts’. The oﬃcial Cult narrativ e
is the only show in town.
Geneviev e Briand found that deaths from all causes w ere not
exceptional in 2020 compared with previous y ears and a Spanish
magazine published ﬁgures that said the same about Spain which
w as a ‘Covid’ propaganda hotspot at one point. Discovery Salud , ahealth and medicine magazine, quoted gov ernment ﬁgures which
show ed how 17,000 fewer  people died in Spain in 2020 than in 2019
and more than 26,000 few er than in 2018. The age-standardised
mortality rate for England and W ales when age distribution is taken
into account w as signiﬁcantly low er in 2020 than the 1970s, 80s and
90s, and w as only the ninth highest since 2000. Where is the
‘pandemic’?
P ost mortems and autopsies virtually disappeared for ‘Covid’
deaths amid claims that ‘virus-infected’ bodily ﬂuids posed a risk to
those carrying out the autopsy . This w as rejected by renowned
German pathologist and forensic doctor Klaus Püschel who said that
he and his staﬀ had by then done 150 autopsies on ‘Covid’ patients
with no problems at all. He said they w ere needed to know why
some ‘Covid’ patients suﬀered blood clots and not sev ere respiratory
infections. The ‘virus’ is, a er all, called SARS or ‘sev ere acute
respiratory syndrome’. I highlighted in the spring of 2020 this
phenomenon and quoted New Y ork intensiv e care doctor Cameron
Kyle-Sidell who posted a soon deleted Y ouT ube video to say that
they had been told to prepare to treat an infectious disease called
‘Covid-19’, but that w as not what they w ere dealing with. Instead he
likened the lung condition of the most sev erely ill patients to what
y ou w ould expect with cabin depressurisation in a plane at 30,000
feet or someone dropped on the top of Ev erest without oxygen or
acclimatisation. I hav e nev er said this is not happening to a small
minority of alleged ‘Covid’ patients – I am saying this is not caused
by a phantom ‘contagious virus’. Indeed Kyle-Sidell said that
‘Covid-19’ w as not the disease they w ere told w as coming their w ay .
‘W e are operating under a medical paradigm that is untrue,’ he said,
and he believ ed they w ere treating the wrong disease: ‘These people
are being slowly starv ed of oxygen.’ P atients w ould take oﬀ their
oxygen masks in a state of fear and stress and while they w ere blue
in the face on the brink of death. They did not look like patients
dying of pneumonia. Y ou can see why they don’ t w ant autopsies
when their virus doesn’ t exist and there is another condition in some
people that they don’ t wish to be uncov ered. I should add here thatthe 5G system of millimetre w av es w as being rapidly introduced
around the w orld in 2020 and ev en more so now as they ﬁre 5G at
the Earth from satellites. At 60 gigahertz within the 5G range that
frequency interacts with the oxygen molecule and stops people
breathing in suﬃcient oxygen to be absorbed into the bloodstream.
They are installing 5G in schools and hospitals. The w orld is not
mad or anything. 5G can cause major changes to the lungs and blood
as I detail in The Answer  and these consequences are labelled ‘Covid-
19’, the alleged symptoms of which can be caused by 5G and other
electromagnetic frequencies as cells respond to radiation poisoning.
The ‘Covid death’ scam
Dr Sco  Jensen, a Minnesota state senator and medical doctor ,
exposed ‘Covid’ Medicare payment incentiv es to hospitals and death
certiﬁcate manipulation. He said he w as sent a sev en-page document
by the US Department of Health ‘coaching’ him on how to ﬁll out
death certiﬁcates which had nev er happened before. The document
said that he didn’ t need to hav e a laboratory test for ‘Covid-19’ to
put that on the death certiﬁcate and that shocked him when death
certiﬁcates are supposed to be about facts. Jensen described how
doctors had been ‘encouraged, if not pressured’ to make a diagnosis
of ‘Covid-19’ if they thought it w as probable or ‘presumed ’. No
positiv e test w as necessary – not that this w ould hav e ma ered
anyw ay . He said doctors w ere told to diagnose ‘Covid’ by symptoms
when these w ere the same as colds, allergies, other respiratory
problems, and certainly with inﬂuenza which ‘disappeared’ in the
‘Covid’ era. A common sniﬄe w as enough to get the dreaded
v erdict. Ontario authorities decreed that a single care home resident
with one  symptom from a long list must lead to the isolation of the
entire home. Other courageous doctors like Jensen made the same
point about death ﬁgure manipulation and how deaths by other
causes w ere falling while ‘Covid-19 deaths’ w ere rising at the same
rate due to re-diagnosis. Their videos rarely surviv e long on
Y ouT ube with its Cult-supporting algorithms courtesy of CEO Susan
W ojcicki and her bosses at Google. Figure-tampering w as so glaringand ubiquitous that ev en oﬃcials w ere le ing it slip or outright
saying it. UK chief scientiﬁc adviser P atrick V allance said on one
occasion that ‘Covid’ on the death certiﬁcate doesn’ t mean ‘Covid’
w as the cause of death (so why the hell is it there?) and w e had the
rare sight of a BBC reporter telling the truth when she said:
‘Someone could be successfully treated for Covid, in say April,
discharged, and then in June, get run ov er by a bus and die … That
person w ould still be counted as a Covid death in England.’ Y et the
BBC and the rest of the w orld media w ent on repeating the case and
death ﬁgures as if they w ere real. Illinois Public Health Director Dr
Ngozi Ezike rev ealed the deceit while her bosses must hav e been
clenching their bu ocks:
I f  y o u  w e r e  i n  a  h o s p i c e  a n d  g i v e n  a  f e w  w e e k s  t o  l i v e  a n d  y o u  w e r e  t h e n  f o u n d  t o  h a v e
C o v i d  t h a t  w o u l d  b e  c o u n t e d  a s  a  C o v i d  d e a t h .  [ T h e r e  m i g h t  b e ]  a  c l e a r  a l t e r n a t e  c a u s e ,  b u t  i t
i s  s t i l l  l i s t e d  a s  a  C o v i d  d e a t h .  S o  e v e r y o n e  l i s t e d  a s  a  C o v i d  d e a t h  d o e s n ’ t  m e a n  t h a t  w a s  t h e
c a u s e  o f  t h e  d e a t h ,  b u t  t h a t  t h e y  h a d  C o v i d  a t  t h e  t i m e  o f  d e a t h .
Y es, a ‘Covid virus’ nev er shown to exist and tested for with a test
not testing for the ‘virus’. In the ﬁrst period of the pandemic hoax
through the spring of 2020 the process began of designating almost
ev erything a ‘Covid’ death and this has continued ev er since. I sat in
a restaurant one night listening to a loud conv ersation on the next
table where a family w as discussing in bewilderment how a relativ e
who had no symptoms of ‘Covid’, and had died of a long-term
problem, could hav e been diagnosed a death by the ‘virus’. I could
understand their bewilderment. If they read this book they will
know why this medical fraud has been perpetrated the w orld ov er .
Some media truth shock
The media ignored the evidence of death certiﬁcate fraud until
ev entually one columnist did speak out when she saw it ﬁrst-hand.
Bel Mooney is a long-time national newspaper journalist in Britain
currently w orking for the Daily Mail . Her article on February 19th,
2021, carried this headline: ‘My dad T ed passed three Covid testsand died of a chronic illness y et he’ s oﬃcially one of Britain’ s 120,000
victims of the virus and is far from alone ... so how many more are
there?’ She told how her 99-y ear -old father w as in a care home with
a long-standing chronic obstructiv e pulmonary disease and v ascular
dementia. Maybe, but he w as still aw are enough to tell her from the
start that there w as no ‘virus’ and he refused the ‘v accine’ for that
reason. His death w as not unexpected giv en his chronic health
problems and Mooney said she w as shocked to ﬁnd that ‘Covid-19’
w as declared the cause of death on his death certiﬁcate. She said this
w as a ‘bizarre and unacceptable untruth’ for a man with long-time
health problems who had tested negativ e twice at the home for the
‘virus’. I w as also shocked by this story although not by what she
said. I had been highlighting the death certiﬁcate manipulation for
ten months. It w as the conﬁrmation that a professional full-time
journalist only realised this w as going on when it aﬀected her
directly and neither did she know that whether her dad tested
positiv e or negativ e w as irrelev ant with the test not testing for the
‘virus’. Where had she been? She said she did not believ e in
‘conspiracy theories’ without knowing I’ m sure that this and
‘conspiracy theorists’ w ere terms put into widespread circulation by
the CIA in the 1960s to discredit those who did not accept the
ridiculous oﬃcial story of the Kennedy assassination. A blanket
statement of ‘I don’ t believ e in conspiracy theories’ is alw ays bizarre.
The dictionary deﬁnition of the term alone means the w orld is
drowning in conspiracies. What she said w as ev en more da  when
her dad had just been aﬀected by the ‘Covid’ conspiracy . Why else
does she think that ‘Covid-19’ w as going on the death certiﬁcates of
people who died of something else?
T o be fair once she saw from personal experience what w as
happening she didn’ t mince w ords. Mooney w as called by the care
home on the morning of February 9th to be told her father had died
in his sleep. When she asked for the oﬃcial cause of death what
came back w as ‘Covid-19’. Mooney challenged this and w as told
there had been deaths from Covid on the dementia ﬂoor (conﬁrmed
by a test not testing for the ‘virus’) so they considered it ‘reasonableto assume’. ‘But doctor ,’ Mooney rightly protested, ‘an assumption
isn’ t a diagnosis.’ She said she didn’ t blame the perfectly decent and
sympathetic doctor – ‘he w as just doing his job’. Sorry , but that’ s
bullshit . He w asn’ t doing his job at all. He w as pu ing a false cause of
death on the death certiﬁcate and that is a criminal oﬀence for which
he should be brought to account and the same with the millions of
doctors w orldwide who hav e done the same. They w ere not doing
their job they w ere following orders and that must not w ash at new
Nuremberg trials any more than it did at the ﬁrst ones. Mooney’ s
doctor w as ‘assuming’ (presuming) as he w as told to, but ‘just
following orders’ makes no diﬀerence to his actions. A doctor ’ s job is
to serv e the patient and the truth, not follow orders, but that’ s what
they hav e done all ov er the w orld and play ed a central part in
making the ‘Covid’ hoax possible with all its catastrophic
consequences for humanity . Shame on them and they must answ er
for their actions. Mooney said her disquiet w orsened when she
registered her father ’ s death by telephone and w as told by the
registrar there had been v ery many other cases like hers where ‘the
deceased’ had not tested positiv e for ‘Covid’ y et it w as recorded as
the cause of death. The test may not ma er , but those inv olv ed at
their lev el think  it ma ers and it shows a callous disregard for
accurate diagnosis. The pressure to do this is coming from the top of
the national ‘health’ pyramids which in turn obey the W orld Health
Organization which obeys Gates and the Cult. Mooney said the
registrar agreed that this must distort the national ﬁgures adding
that ‘the strangest thing is that ev ery winter w e record countless
deaths from ﬂu, and this winter there hav e been none. Not one!’ She
asked if the registrar thought deaths from ﬂu w ere being
misdiagnosed and lumped together with ‘Covid’ deaths. The answ er
w as a ‘puzzled y es’. Mooney said that the funeral director said the
same about ‘Covid’ deaths which had nothing to do with ‘Covid’.
They had lost count of the number of families upset by this and
other funeral companies in diﬀerent countries hav e had the same
experience. Mooney wrote:T h e  n i g h t l y  s h r o u d - w a v i n g  a n d  s h o c k i n g  c l o s e - u p s  o f  p a i n  i m p o s e d  o n  u s  b y  t h e  T V  n e w s
b e w i l d e r e d  a n d  t e r r i f i e d  t h e  p o p u l a t i o n  i n t o  e a g e r  c o m p l i a n c e  w i t h  l o c k d o w n s .  W e  w e r e
i n v i t e d  t o  ‘ s a v e  t h e  N H S ’  a n d  t o  g r i e v e  f o r  s t r a n g e r s  –  t h e  r e a l - l i f e  l o v e d  o n e s  b e h i n d  t h o s e
s h o c k i n g  d e a t h  c o u n t s .  W h y  w o u l d  t h e  p u b l i c  i m a g i n e  w h a t  I  n o w  f e a r ,  n a m e l y  t h a t  t h e  w a y
C o v i d - 1 9  d e a t h  s t a t i s t i c s  a r e  c o m p i l e d  m i g h t  m a k e  t h e  n u m b e r s  s e e m  g r e a t e r  t h a n  t h e y  a r e ?
Oh, just a li le bit – like 100 percent.
Do the maths
Mooney asked why a country w ould wish to skew its mortality
ﬁgures by wrongly certifying deaths? What had been going on?
W ell, if y ou don’ t believ e in conspiracies y ou will nev er ﬁnd the
answ er which is that it’s a conspiracy . She did, how ev er , describe
what she had discov ered as a ‘national scandal’. In reality it’ s a
global scandal and happening ev erywhere. Pillars of this conspiracy
w ere all put into place before the bu on w as pressed with the
Drosten PCR protocol and high ampliﬁcations to produce the cases
and death certiﬁcate changes to secure illusory ‘Covid’ deaths.
Mooney notes that normally tw o doctors w ere needed to certify a
death, with one having to know the patient, and how the rules w ere
changed in the spring of 2020 to allow one doctor to do this. In the
same period ‘Covid deaths’ w ere decreed to be all cases where
Covid-19 w as put on the death certiﬁcate ev en without a positiv e test
or any symptoms. Mooney asked: ‘How many of the 30,851 (as of
January 15) care home resident deaths with Covid-19 on the
certiﬁcate (32.4 per cent of all deaths so far) w ere based on an
assumption, like that of my father? And what has that done to our
national psyche?’All of them is the answ er to the ﬁrst question and it
has dev astated and dismantled the national psyche, actually the
global psyche, on a colossal scale. In the UK case and death data is
compiled by organisations like Public Health England (PHE) and the
Oﬃce for National Statistics (ONS). Mooney highlights the insane
policy of counting a death from any cause as ‘Covid-19’ if this
happens within 28 days of a positiv e test (with a test not testing for
the ‘virus’) and she points out that ONS statistics reﬂect deaths
‘inv olving Covid’ ‘or due to Covid’ which meant in practice anydeath where ‘Covid-19’ w as mentioned on the death certiﬁcate. She
described the consequences of this fraud:
M o s t  p e o p l e  w i l l  a c c e p t  t h e  n a r r a t i v e  t h e y  a r e  f e d ,  s o  p a n i c k y  g o v e r n m e n t s  h e r e  a n d  i n
E u r o p e  w i t n e s s e d  t h e  h a r s h  m e a s u r e s  e n a c t e d  i n  t o t a l i t a r i a n  C h i n a  a n d  j u m p e d  i n t o
l o c k d o w n .  H e a d l i n e s  a b o u t  C o v i d  d e a t h s  t o l l e d  l i k e  t h e  k n e l l  t h a t  w o u l d  b r i n g  d o o m s d a y  t o
u s  a l l .  F e a r  s t a l k e d  o u r  e m p t y  s t r e e t s .  P o l i t i c i a n s  p a r r o t e d  t h e  f r a n k l y  r i d i c u l o u s  a i m  o f  ‘ z e r o
C o v i d ’  a n d  s h u t  d o w n  t h e  e c o n o m y ,  w h i l e  m o s t  B r i t i s h  p e o p l e  a g r e e d  t h a t  l o c k d o w n  w a s
e s s e n t i a l  a n d  ( a s t o n i s h i n g l y  t o  m e ,  a s  a  p a t r i o t i c  B r i t )  e v e n  w a n t e d  m o r e  r e s t r i c t i o n s .
F o r  w h a t ?  L i e s  o n  d e a t h  c e r t i f i c a t e s ?  N e v e r  m i n d  t h e  g r i m  t o l l  o f  l i v e s  r u i n e d ,  s u i c i d e s ,  s c h o o l s
c l o s e d ,  r i s i n g  i n e q u a l i t y ,  d e p r e s s i o n ,  c a n c e l l e d  h o s p i t a l  t r e a t m e n t s ,  c a n c e r  p a t i e n t s  i n  a  t o r t u r e
o f  w a i t i n g ,  p o v e r t y ,  e c o n o m i c  d e v a s t a t i o n ,  l o n e l i n e s s ,  f a m i l i e s  k e p t  a p a r t ,  a n d  s o  o n .  H o w
m a n y  l i v e s  h a v e  b e e n  l o s t  a s  a  d i r e c t  r e s u l t  o f  l o c k d o w n ?
She said that w e could join in a national chorus of shock and horror
at reaching the 120,000 death toll which w as surely certain to hav e
been totally skew ed all along, but what about the human cost of
lockdown justiﬁed by these ‘death ﬁgures’? The British Medical
Journal  had reported a 1,493 percent increase in cases of children
taken to Great Ormond Street Hospital with abusiv e head injuries
alone and then there w as the eﬀect on families:
P e r h a p s  t h e  m o s t  s h o c k i n g  t h i n g  a b o u t  a l l  t h i s  i s  t h a t  f a m i l i e s  h a v e  b e e n  k e p t  a p a r t  –  a n d
o b e y e d  t h e  m o s t  i r r a t i o n a l ,  c h a n g i n g  r u l e s  a t  t h e  w h i m  o f  g o v e r n m e n t  –  b e c a u s e  t h e y
b e l i e v e d  i n  t h e  s t a t i s t i c s .  T h e y  s u c c u m b e d  t o  f e a r ,  w h i c h  h i s  g e n e r a t i o n  r e j e c t e d  i n  t h a t  w a r
f o u g h t  f o r  f r e e d o m .  D a d  ( G o d  r e s t  h i s  s o u l )  w o u l d  b e  a n g r y .  A n d  s o  a m  I .
Another theme to w atch is that in the winter months when there
are more deaths from all causes they focus on ‘Covid’ deaths and in
the summer when the British Lung Foundation says respiratory
disease plummets by 80 percent they rage on about ‘cases’. Either
w ay fascism on population is alw ays the answ er .
Nazi eugenics in the 21st century
Elderly people in care homes hav e been isolated from their families
month a er lonely month with no contact with relativ es and
grandchildren who w ere banned from seeing them. W e w ere toldthat lockdown fascism w as to ‘protect the vulnerable’ like elderly
people. At the same time Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) orders w ere
placed on their medical ﬁles so that if they needed resuscitation it
w asn’ t done and ‘Covid-19’ w ent on their death certiﬁcates. Old
people w ere not being ‘protected’ they w ere being culled –
murdered in truth. DNR orders w ere being decreed for disabled and
y oung people with learning diﬃculties or psychological problems.
The UK Care Quality Commission, a non-departmental body of the
Department of Health and Social Care, found that 34 percent of
those w orking in health and social care w ere pressured into placing
‘do not a empt cardiopulmonary resuscitation’ orders on ‘Covid’
patients who suﬀered from disabilities and learning diﬃculties
without inv olving the patient or their families in the decision. UK
judges ruled that an elderly w oman with dementia should hav e the
DNA-manipulating ‘Covid v accine’ against her son’ s wishes and that
a man with sev ere learning diﬃculties should hav e the jab despite
his family’ s objections. Nev er mind that many had already died. The
judiciary alw ays supports doctors and gov ernment in fascist
dictatorships. They w ouldn’ t dare do otherwise. A horriﬁc video w as
posted showing fascist oﬃcers from Los Angeles police forcibly
giving the ‘Covid’ shot to w omen with special needs who w ere
screaming that they didn’ t w ant it. The same fascists are seen giving
the jab to a sleeping elderly w oman in a care home. This is straight
out of the Nazi playbook. Hitler ’ s Nazis commi ed mass murder of
the mentally ill and physically disabled throughout Germany and
occupied territories in the programme that became known as Aktion
T4, or just T4. Sabbatian-controlled Hitler and his grotesque crazies
set out to kill those they considered useless and unnecessary . The
Reich Commi ee for the Scientiﬁc Registering of Hereditary and
Congenital Illnesses registered the births of babies identiﬁed by
physicians to hav e ‘defects’. By 1941 alone more than 5,000 children
w ere murdered by the state and it is estimated that in total the
number of innocent people killed in Aktion T4 w as betw een 275,000
and 300,000. P arents w ere told their children had been sent aw ay for
‘special treatment’ nev er to return. It is rather pathetic to see claims
about plans for new extermination camps being dismissed todaywhen the same force behind current ev ents did precisely that 80
y ears ago. Margaret Sanger w as a Cult operativ e who used ‘birth
control’ to sanitise her programme of eugenics. Organisations she
founded became what is now Planned P arenthood. Sanger proposed
that ‘the whole dysgenic population w ould hav e its choice of
segregation or sterilization’. These included epileptics, ‘feeble-
minded’, and prostitutes. Sanger opposed charity because it
perpetuated ‘human w aste‘. She rev eals the Cult mentality and if
any one thinks that extermination camps are a ‘conspiracy theory’
their naiv ety is touching if breathtakingly stupid.
If y ou don’ t believ e that doctors can act with callous disregard for
their patients it is w orth considering that doctors and medical staﬀ
agreed to put gov ernment-decreed DNR orders on medical ﬁles and
do nothing when resuscitation is called for . I don’ t know what y ou
call such people in y our house. In mine they are Nazis from the Josef
Mengele School of Medicine. Phenomenal numbers of old people
hav e died w orldwide from the eﬀects of lockdown, depression, lack
of treatment, the ‘v accine’ (more later) and losing the will to liv e. A
common response at the start of the manufactured pandemic w as to
remov e old people from hospital beds and transfer them to nursing
homes. The decision w ould result in a mass cull of elderly people in
those homes through lack of treatment – not  ‘Covid’. Care home
whistleblow ers hav e told how once the ‘Covid’ era began doctors
w ould not come to their homes to treat patients and they w ere
begging for drugs like antibiotics that o en nev er came. The most
infamous example w as ordered by New Y ork gov ernor Andrew
Cuomo, brother of a moronic CNN host, who amazingly w as giv en
an Emmy A w ard for his handling of the ‘Covid crisis’ by the
ridiculous W okers that hand them out. Just how ridiculous could be
seen in February , 2021, when a Department of Justice and FBI
inv estigation began into how thousands of old people in New Y ork
died in nursing homes a er being discharged from hospital to make
w ay for ‘Covid’ patients on Cuomo’ s say-so – and how he and his
staﬀ cov ered up these facts. This couldn’ t hav e happened to a nicer
psychopath. Ev en then there w as a ‘Covid’ spin. Reports said thatthousands of old people who tested positiv e for ‘Covid’ in hospital
w ere transferred to nursing homes to both die of ‘Covid’ and
transmit it to others. No – they w ere in hospital because they w ere ill
and the fact that they tested positiv e with a test not testing for the
‘virus’ is irrelev ant. They w ere ill o en with respiratory diseases
ubiquitous in old people near the end of their liv es. Their transfer
out of hospital meant that their treatment stopped and many w ould
go on to die.
They’re old. Who gives a damn?
I hav e exposed in the books for decades the Cult plan to cull the
w orld’ s old people and ev en to introduce at some point what they
call a ‘demise pill’ which at a certain age ev ery one w ould take and
be out of here by law . In March, 2021, Spain legalised euthanasia and
assisted suicide following the Netherlands, Belgium, Luxembourg
and Canada on the Tiptoe to the demise pill. T reatment of old people
by many ‘care’ homes has been a disgrace in the ‘Covid’ era. There
are many , many , caring staﬀ – I know some. There hav e, how ev er ,
been legions of stories about callous treatment of old people and
their families. P olice w ere called when families came to take their
lov ed ones home in the light of isolation that w as killing them. They
became prisoners of the state. Care home residents in insane, fascist
Ontario, Canada, w ere not allow ed to leav e their room  once the
‘Covid’ hoax began. UK staﬀ hav e ev en wheeled elderly people
aw ay from windows where family members w ere talking with them.
Oriana Criscuolo from Stockport in the English North W est dropped
oﬀ some things for her 80-y ear -old father who has P arkinson’ s
disease and dementia and she w anted to w av e to him through a
ground-ﬂoor window . She w as told that w as ‘illegal’. When she w ent
anyw ay they closed the curtains in the middle of the day . Oriana
said:
I t ’ s  j u s t  u n b e l i e v a b l e .  I  c a n n o t  u n d e r s t a n d  h o w  c a r e  h o m e  s t a f f  –  p e o p l e  w h o  a r e  b e i n g  p a i d
t o  c a r e  –  h a v e  b e c o m e  s o  u n c a r i n g .  T h e i r  b e h a v i o u r  i s  i n h u m a n e  a n d  c r u e l .  I t ’ s  b e y o n d  b e l i e f .She w as right and this w as not a one-oﬀ. What a w ay to end y our life
in such lov eless circumstances. UK registered nurse Nicky Millen, a
proper old school nurse for 40 y ears, said that when she started her
career care w as based on dignity , choice, compassion and empathy .
Now she said ‘the things that are important to me hav e gone out of
the window .’ She w as appalled that people w ere dying without their
lov ed ones and saying goodby e on iP ads. Nicky described how a
distressed 89-y ear -old lady stroked her face and asked her ‘how
many paracetamol w ould it take to ﬁnish me oﬀ ’. Life w as no longer
w orth living while not seeing her family . Nicky said she w as
humiliated in front of the w ard staﬀ and patients for le ing the lady
stroke her face and giving her a cuddle. Such is the dehumanisation
that the ‘Covid’ hoax has brought to the surface. Nicky w orked in
care homes where patients told her they w ere being held prisoner . ‘I
w ant to liv e until I die’, one said to her . ‘I had a lady in tears because
she hadn’ t seen her great-grandson.’ Nicky w as compassionate old
school meeting psychopathic New Normal. She also said she had
w orked on a ‘Covid’ w ard with no ‘Covid’ patients. Jewish writer
Shai Held wrote an article in March, 2020, which w as headlined ‘The
Staggering, Heartless Cruelty T ow ard the Elderly’. What he
described w as happening from the earliest days of lockdown. He
said ‘the elderly’ w ere considered a group and not unique
individuals (the w ay of the W oke). Shai Held said:
N o t i c e  h o w  t h e  a l l - t o o - f a m i l i a r  r h e t o r i c  o f  d e h u m a n i z a t i o n  w o r k s :  ‘ T h e  e l d e r l y ’  a r e  b u n c h e d
t o g e t h e r  a s  a  f a c e l e s s  m a s s ,  a l l  o f  t h e m  c o n s i d e r e d  c u l p r i t s  a n d  t h u s  e f f e c t i v e l y  d e s e r v i n g  o f
t h e  s u f f e r i n g  t h e  p a n d e m i c  w i l l  i n f l i c t  u p o n  t h e m .  L o s t  e n t i r e l y  i s  t h e  f a c t  t h a t  t h e  e l d e r l y  a r e
i n d i v i d u a l  h u m a n  b e i n g s ,  e a c h  w i t h  a  d i s t i n c t i v e  f a c e  a n d  v o i c e ,  e a c h  w i t h  h o p e s  a n d
d r e a m s ,  m e m o r i e s  a n d  r e g r e t s ,  f r i e n d s h i p s  a n d  m a r r i a g e s ,  l o v e s  l o s t  a n d  l o v e s  s u s t a i n e d .
‘The elderly’ hav e become another dehumanised group for which
anything goes and for many that has resulted in cold disregard for
their rights and their life. The distinctiv e face that Held talks about is
designed to be deleted by masks until ev ery one is part of a faceless
mass.‘War-zone’ hospitals myth
Again and again medical professionals hav e told me what w as really
going on and how hospitals ‘ov errun like w ar zones’ according to
the media w ere virtually empty . The mantra from medical
whistleblow ers w as please don’ t use my name or my career is ov er .
Citizen journalists around the w orld sneaked into hospitals to ﬁlm
evidence exposing the ‘w ar -zone’ lie. They really were  largely empty
with closed w ards and operating theatres. I met a hospital w orker in
my town on the Isle of W ight during the ﬁrst lockdown in 2020 who
said the only island hospital had nev er been so quiet. Lockdown w as
justiﬁed by the psychopaths to stop hospitals being ov errun. At the
same time that the island hospital w as near -empty the military
arriv ed here to provide extra beds . It w as all propaganda to ramp up
the fear to ensure compliance with fascism as w ere nev er -used
temporary hospitals with thousands of beds known as Nightingales
and nev er -used make-shi  mortuaries opened by the criminal UK
gov ernment. A man who helped to install those extra island beds
a ributed to the army said they w ere nev er used and the hospital
w as empty . Doctors and nurses ‘stood around talking or on their
phones, w andering down to us to see what w e w ere doing’. There
w ere no masks or social distancing. He accused the useless local
island paper , the County Press , of ‘pumping the fear as if our hospital
w as ov errun and w e only hav e one so it should hav e been’. He
described ambulances parked up with crews outside in deck chairs.
When his brother called an ambulance he w as told there w as a tw o-
hour backlog which he called ‘bullshit’. An old lady on the island fell
‘and w as in a bad w ay’, but a caller who rang for an ambulance w as
told the situation w asn’ t urgent enough. Ambulance stations w ere
w orking under capacity while people w ould hear ambulances with
sirens blaring driving through the streets. When those living near
the stations realised what w as going on they w ould follow them as
they le , circulated around an urban area with the sirens going, and
then came back without stopping. All this w as to increase lev els of
fear and the same goes for the ‘v entilator shortage crisis’ that cost
tens of millions for hastily produced v entilators nev er to be used.Ambulance crews that agreed to be exploited in this w ay for fear
propaganda might ﬁnd themselv es a mirror . I wish them w ell with
that. Empty hospitals w ere the obvious consequence of treatment
and diagnoses of non-’Covid’ conditions cancelled and those
inv olv ed handed a death sentence. P eople hav e been dying at home
from undiagnosed and untreated cancer , heart disease and other life-
threatening conditions to allow empty hospitals to deal with a
‘pandemic’ that w asn’ t happening.
Death of the innocent
‘W ar -zones’ hav e been laying oﬀ nursing staﬀ, ev en doctors where
they can. There w as no w ork for them. Lockdown w as justiﬁed by
saving liv es and protecting the vulnerable they w ere actually killing
with DNR orders and prev enting empty hospitals being ‘ov errun’. In
Britain the mantra of stay at home to ‘sav e the NHS’ w as ev erywhere
and across the w orld the same story w as being sold when it w as all
lies. T w o California doctors, Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi at
Accelerated Urgent Care in Bakersﬁeld, held a news conference in
April, 2020, to say that intensiv e care units in California w ere ‘empty ,
essentially’, with hospitals shu ing ﬂoors, not treating patients and
laying oﬀ doctors. The California health system w as w orking at
minimum capacity ‘ge ing rid of doctors because w e just don’ t hav e
the v olume’. They said that people with conditions such as heart
disease and cancer w ere not coming to hospital out of fear of ‘Covid-
19’. Their video w as deleted by Susan W ojcicki’ s Cult-owned
Y ouT ube a er reaching ﬁv e million views. Florida gov ernor Ron
Desantis, who rejected the sev ere lockdowns of other states and is
being targeted for doing so, said that in March, 2020, ev ery US
gov ernor w as giv en models claiming they w ould run out of hospital
beds in days. That w as nev er going to happen and the ‘modellers’
knew it. Deceit can be found at ev ery lev el of the system. Urgent
children’ s operations w ere cancelled including fracture repairs and
biopsies to spot cancer . Eric Nicholls, a consultant paediatrician, said
‘this is obviously concerning and w e need to return to normal
operating and to increase capacity as soon as possible’. Psychopathsin pow er w ere rather less concerned because  they are psychopaths.
Deletion of urgent care and diagnosis has been happening all ov er
the w orld and how many kids and others hav e died as a result of the
actions of these cold and heartless lunatics dictating ‘health’ policy?
The number must be stratospheric. Richard Sulliv an, professor of
cancer and global health at King’ s College London, said people
feared ‘Covid’ more than cancer such w as the campaign of fear .
‘Y ears of lost life will be quite dramatic’, Sulliv an said, with ‘a huge
amount of av oidable mortality’. Sarah W oolnough, executiv e
director for policy at Cancer Research UK, said there had been a 75
percent drop in urgent referrals to hospitals by family doctors of
people with suspected cancer . Sulliv an said that ‘a lot of services
hav e had to scale back – w e’v e seen a dramatic decrease in the
amount of electiv e cancer surgery’. Lockdown deaths w orldwide has
been absolutely fantastic with the New York Post  reporting how data
conﬁrmed that ‘lockdowns end more liv es than they sav e’:
T h e r e  w a s  a  s h a r p  d e c l i n e  i n  v i s i t s  t o  e m e r g e n c y  r o o m s  a n d  a n  i n c r e a s e  i n  f a t a l  h e a r t  a t t a c k s
b e c a u s e  p a t i e n t s  d i d n ’ t  r e c e i v e  p r o m p t  t r e a t m e n t .  M a n y  f e w e r  p e o p l e  w e r e  s c r e e n e d  f o r
c a n c e r .  S o c i a l  i s o l a t i o n  c o n t r i b u t e d  t o  e x c e s s  d e a t h s  f r o m  d e m e n t i a  a n d  A l z h e i m e r ’ s .
R e s e a r c h e r s  p r e d i c t e d  t h a t  t h e  s o c i a l  a n d  e c o n o m i c  u p h e a v a l  w o u l d  l e a d  t o  t e n s  o f  t h o u s a n d s
o f  “ d e a t h s  o f  d e s p a i r ”  f r o m  d r u g  o v e r d o s e s ,  a l c o h o l i s m  a n d  s u i c i d e .  A s  u n e m p l o y m e n t  s u r g e d
a n d  m e n t a l - h e a l t h  a n d  s u b s t a n c e - a b u s e  t r e a t m e n t  p r o g r a m s  w e r e  i n t e r r u p t e d ,  t h e  r e p o r t e d
l e v e l s  o f  a n x i e t y ,  d e p r e s s i o n  a n d  s u i c i d a l  t h o u g h t s  i n c r e a s e d  d r a m a t i c a l l y ,  a s  d i d  a l c o h o l  s a l e s
a n d  f a t a l  d r u g  o v e r d o s e s .
This has been happening while nurses and other staﬀ had so much
time on their hands in the ‘w ar -zones’ that Tic- T ok dancing videos
began appearing across the Internet with medical staﬀ dancing
around in empty w ards and corridors as people died at home from
causes that w ould normally hav e been treated in hospital.
Mentions in dispatches
One brav e and truth-commi ed whistleblow er w as Louise
Hampton, a call handler with the UK NHS who made a viral
Internet video saying she had done ‘fuck all’ during the ‘pandemic’which w as ‘a load of bollocks’. She said that ‘Covid-19’ w as
rebranded ﬂu and of course she lost her job. This is what happens in
the medical and endless other professions now when y ou tell the
truth. Louise ﬁlmed inside ‘w ar -zone’ accident and emergency
departments to show they w ere empty and I mean empty  as in no
one there. The mainstream media could hav e done the same and
blown the gaﬀ on the whole conspiracy . They hav en’ t to their eternal
shame. Not that most ‘journalists’ seem capable of manifesting
shame as with the psychopaths they slavishly repeat without
question. The relativ e few who w ere admi ed with serious health
problems w ere le  to die alone with no lov ed ones allow ed to see
them because of ‘Covid’ rules and they included kids dying without
the comfort of mum and dad at their bedside while the evil behind
this couldn’ t giv e a damn. It w as all good fun to them. A Sco ish
NHS staﬀ nurse publicly quit in the spring of 2021 saying: ‘I can no
longer be part of the lies and the corruption by the gov ernment.’ She
said hospitals ‘aren’ t full, the beds aren’ t full, beds hav e been shut,
w ards hav e been shut’. Hospitals w ere nev er busy throughout
‘Covid’. The staﬀ nurse said that Nicola Sturgeon, tragically the
leader of the Sco ish gov ernment, w as on television saying sav e the
hospitals and the NHS – ‘but the beds are empty’ and ‘w e’v e not
seen ﬂu, w e alw ays see ﬂu ev ery y ear ’. She wrote to gov ernment and
spoke with her union Unison (the unions are Cult-compromised and
useless , but nothing changed. Many of her colleagues w ere scared of
losing their jobs if they spoke out as they w anted to. She said
nursing staﬀ w ere being aﬀected by w earing masks all day and ‘my
head is spli ing ev ery shi  from w earing a mask’. The NHS is part
of the fascist tyranny and must be dismantled so w e can start again
with human beings in charge. (Ironically , hospitals w ere reported to
be busier again when oﬃcial ‘Covid’ cases fell  in spring/summer of
2021 and many other conditions required treatment at the same time
as the fake vaccine rollout .)
I will cov er the ‘Covid v accine’ scam in detail later , but it is
another indicator of the sickening disregard for human life that I am
highlighting here. The DNA-manipulating concoctions do not fulﬁlthe deﬁnition of a ‘v accine’, hav e nev er been used on humans before
and w ere giv en only emergency approv al because trials w ere not
completed and they continued using the unknowing public. The
result w as what a NHS senior nurse with responsibility for ‘v accine’
procedure said w as ‘genocide’. She said the ‘v accines’ w ere not
‘v accines’. They had not been shown to be safe and claims about
their eﬀectiv eness by drug companies w ere ‘poetic licence’. She
described what w as happening as a ‘horrid act of human
annihilation’. The nurse said that management had instigated a
policy of not providing a P atient Information Leaﬂet (PIL) before
people w ere ‘v accinated’ ev en though health care professionals are
supposed to do this according to protocol. P atients should also be
told that they are taking part in an ongoing clinical trial. Her
challenges to what is happening had seen her excluded from
meetings and ridiculed in others. She said she w as told to ‘w atch my
step … or I w ould ﬁnd myself surplus to requirements’. The nurse,
who spoke anonymously in fear of her career , said she asked her
NHS manager why he/she w as content with taking part in genocide
against those having the ‘v accines’. The reply w as that ev ery one had
to play their part and to ‘put up, shut up, and get it done’.
Gov ernment w as ‘leaning heavily’ on NHS management which w as
clearly leaning heavily on staﬀ. This is how the global ‘medical’
hierarchy operates and it starts with the Cult and its W orld Health
Organization.
She told the story of a doctor who had the Pﬁzer jab and when
questioned had no idea what w as in it. The doctor had nev er read
the literature. W e hav e to stop treating doctors as intellectual giants
when so many are moral and medical pygmies. The doctor did not
ev en know that the ‘v accines’ w ere not fully approv ed or that their
trials w ere ongoing. They w ere, how ev er , asking their patients if
they minded taking part in follow-ups for research purposes – y es,
the ongoing clinical  trial . The nurse said the doctor ’ s ignorance w as
not rare and she had spoken to a hospital consultant who had the jab
without any idea of the background or that the ‘trials’ had not been
completed. Nurses and pharmacists had shown the same ignorance.‘My NHS colleagues hav e forsaken their duty of care, broken their
code of conduct – Hippocratic Oath – and hav e been brainw ashed
just the same as the majority of the UK public through propaganda
…’ She said she had not been able to recruit a single NHS colleague,
doctor , nurse or pharmacist to stand with her and speak out. Her
union had refused to help. She said that if the genocide came to light
she w ould not hesitate to giv e evidence at a Nuremberg-type trial
against those in pow er who could hav e aﬀected the outcomes but
didn’ t.
And all for what?
T o put the nonsense into perspectiv e let’ s say the ‘virus’ does exist
and let’ s go completely crazy and accept that the oﬃcial
manipulated ﬁgures for cases and deaths are accurate. Even then  a
study by Stanford Univ ersity epidemiologist Dr John Ioannidis
published on the W orld Health Organization w ebsite produced an
av erage infection to fatality rate of … 0.23 percent!  Ioannidis said: ‘If
one could sample equally from all locations globally , the median
infection fatality rate might ev en be substantially low er than the
0.23% observ ed in my analysis.’ For healthy people under 70 it w as
… 0.05 percent ! This compares with the 3.4 percent claimed by the
Cult-owned W orld Health Organization when the hoax w as ﬁrst
play ed and maximum fear needed to be generated. An updated
Stanford study in April, 2021, put the ‘infection’ to ‘fatality’ rate at
just 0.15 percent. Another team of scientists led by Megan O’Driscoll
and Henrik Salje studied data from 45 countries and published their
ﬁndings on the Nature w ebsite. For children and y oung people the
ﬁgure is so small it virtually does not register although authorities
will be hyping dangers to the y oung when they introduce DNA-
manipulating ‘v accines’ for children. The O’Driscoll study produced
an av erage infection-fatality ﬁgure of 0.003 for children from birth to
four; 0.001 for 5 to 14; 0.003 for 15 to 19; and it w as still only 0.456 up
to 64. T o claim that children must be ‘v accinated’ to protect them
from ‘Covid’ is an obvious lie and so there must be another reason
and there is. What’ s more the av erage age of a ‘Covid’ death is akinto the av erage age that people die in general. The av erage age of
death in England is about 80 for men and 83 for w omen. The av erage
age of death from alleged ‘Covid’ is betw een 82 and 83. California
doctors, Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi, said at their April media
conference that projection models of millions of deaths had been
‘w oefully inaccurate’. They produced detailed ﬁgures showing that
Californians had a 0.03 chance of dying from ‘Covid’ based on the
number of people who tested positiv e (with a test not testing for the
‘virus’). Erickson said there w as a 0.1 percent chance of dying from
‘Covid’ in the state  of New Y ork, not just the city , and a 0.05 percent
chance in Spain, a centre of ‘Covid-19’ hysteria at one stage. The
Stanford studies supported the doctors’ data with fatality rate
estimates of 0.23 and 0.15 percent. How close are these ﬁgures to my
estimate of zero ? Death-rate ﬁgures claimed by the W orld Health
Organization at the start of the hoax w ere some 15 times higher . The
California doctors said there w as no justiﬁcation for lockdowns and
the economic dev astation they caused. Ev erything they had ev er
learned about quarantine w as that y ou quarantine the sick  and not
the healthy . They had nev er seen this before and it made no medical
sense.
Why in the in the light of all this w ould gov ernments and medical
systems the w orld ov er say that billions must go under house arrest;
lose their liv elihood; in many cases lose their mind, their health and
their life; force people to w ear masks dangerous to health and
psychology; make human interaction and ev en family interaction a
criminal oﬀence; ban trav el; close restaurants, bars, w atching liv e
sport, concerts, theatre, and any activity inv olving human
togetherness and discourse; and closing schools to isolate children
from their friends and cause many to commit suicide in acts of
hopelessness and despair? The California doctors said lockdown
consequences included increased child abuse, partner abuse,
alcoholism, depression, and other impacts they w ere seeing ev ery
day . Who w ould do that to the entire human race if not mentally-ill
psychopaths of almost unimaginable extremes like Bill Gates? W e
must face the reality of what w e are dealing with and come out ofdenial. Fascism and tyranny are made possible only by the target
population submi ing and acquiescing to fascism and tyranny . The
whole of human history shows that to be true. Most people naiv ely
and unquestioning believ ed what they w ere told about a ‘deadly
virus’ and meekly and w eakly submi ed to house arrest. Those who
didn’ t believ e it – at least in total – still submi ed in fear of the
consequences of not doing so. For the rest who w ouldn’ t submit
draconian ﬁnes hav e been imposed, brutal policing by psychopaths
for  psychopaths, and condemnation from the meek and w eak who
condemn the Pushbackers on behalf of the v ery force that has them,
too, in its gunsights. ‘P athetic’ does not ev en begin to suﬃce.
Britain’ s brainless ‘Health’ Secretary Ma  Hancock w arned any one
lying to border oﬃcials about returning from a list of ‘hotspot’
countries could face a jail sentence of up to ten y ears which is more
than for racially-aggrav ated assault, incest and a empting to hav e
sex with a child under 13. Hancock is a lunatic, but he has the state
apparatus behind him in a Cult-led chain reaction and the same with
UK ‘V accine Minister ’ Nadhim Zahawi, a prominent member of the
mega-Cult secret society , Le Cercle, which featured in my earlier
books. The Cult enforces its will on gov ernments and medical
systems; gov ernment and medical systems enforce their will on
business and police; business enforces its will on staﬀ who enforce it
on customers; police enforce the will of the Cult on the population
and play their essential part in creating a w orld of fascist control that
their own children and grandchildren will hav e to liv e in their entire
liv es. It is a hierarchical pyramid of imposition and acquiescence
and, y es indeedy , of clinical insanity .
Does any one bright enough to read this book hav e to ask what the
answ er is? I think not, but I will rev eal it anyw ay in the few est of
syllables: T ell the psychos and their moronic lackeys to fuck oﬀ and
let’ s get on with our liv es. W e are many – They are few .ICHAPTER SEVEN
War on your mind
One believes things because one has been conditioned to believe
them
Aldous Huxley, Brave New W orld
hav e described the ‘Covid’ hoax as a ‘Psy op’ and that is true in
ev ery sense and on ev ery lev el in accordance with the deﬁnition of
that term which is psychological w arfare. Break down the ‘Covid
pandemic’ to the foundation themes and it is psychological w arfare
on the human individual and collectiv e mind.
The same can be said for the entire human belief system inv olving
ev ery subject y ou can imagine. Huxley w as right in his contention
that people believ e what they are conditioned to believ e and this
comes from the repetition throughout their liv es of the same
falsehoods. They spew from gov ernment, corporations, media and
endless streams of ‘experts’ telling y ou what the Cult w ants y ou to
believ e and o en believing it themselv es (although far  from alw ays).
‘Experts’ are rew arded with ‘prestigious’ jobs and titles and as
agents of perceptual programming with regular access to the media.
The Cult has to control the narrativ e – control information  – or they
lose control of the vital, crucial, without-which-they-cannot-prev ail
public perception of reality . The foundation of that control today is
the Internet made possible by the Defense Adv anced Research
Projects Agency (DARP A), the incredibly sinister technological arm
of the P entagon. The Internet is the result of military technology .DARP A openly brags about establishing the Internet which has been
a long-term project to lasso the minds of the global population. I
hav e said for decades the plan is to control information to such an
extreme that ev entually no one w ould see or hear anything that the
Cult does not approv e. W e are closing in on that end with ferocious
censorship since the ‘Covid’ hoax began and in my case it started
back in the 1990s in terms of books and speaking v enues. I had to
create my own publishing company in 1995 precisely because no one
else w ould publish my books ev en then. I think they’ re all still
running.
Cult Internet
T o secure total control of information they needed the Internet in
which pre-programmed algorithms can seek out ‘unclean’ content
for deletion and ev en stop it being posted in the ﬁrst place. The Cult
had to dismantle print and non-Internet broadcast media to ensure
the transfer of information to the appropriate-named ‘W eb’ – a
critical expression of the Cult  w eb. W e’v e seen the ev er -quickening
demise of traditional media and control of what is le  by a tiny
number of corporations operating w orldwide. Independent
journalism in the mainstream is already dead and nev er w as that
more obvious than since the turn of 2020. The Cult w ants all
information communicated via the Internet to globally censor and
allow the plug to be pulled any time. Lockdowns and forced
isolation has meant that communication betw een people has been
through electronic means and no longer through face-to-face
discourse and discussion. Cult psychopaths hav e targeted the bars,
restaurants, sport, v enues and meeting places in general for this
reason. None of this is by chance and it’ s to stop people gathering in
any kind of priv acy or number while being able to track and monitor
all Internet communications and block them as necessary . Ev en
priv ate messages betw een individuals hav e been censored by these
fascists that control Cult fronts like Facebook, T wi er , Google and
Y ouT ube which are all oﬃcially run by Sabbatian place-people and
from the background by higher -lev el Sabbatian place people.Facebook, Google, Amazon and their like w ere seed-funded and
supported into existence with money-no-object infusions of funds
either directly or indirectly from DARP A and CIA technology arm
In-Q- T el. The Cult plays the long game and prepares v ery carefully
for big plays like ‘Covid’. Amazon is another front in the
psychological w ar and pre y much controls the global market in
book sales and increasingly publishing. Amazon’ s limitless funds
hav e deleted fantastic numbers of independent publishers to seize
global domination on the w ay to deciding which books can be sold
and circulated and which cannot. Mov es in that direction are already
happening. Amazon’ s leading light Jeﬀ Bezos is the grandson of
Lawrence Preston Gise who w orked with DARP A predecessor
ARP A. Amazon has big connections to the CIA and the P entagon.
The plan I hav e long described w ent like this:
1. Employ military technology to establish the Internet.
2. Sell the Internet as a place where people can freely communicate without censorship and
allow that to happen until the Net becomes the central and irrev ersible pillar of human
society . If the Internet had been highly censored from the start many w ould hav e rejected it.
3. Fund and manipulate major corporations into being to control the circulation of
information on y our Internet using cov er stories about geeks in garages to explain how they
came about. Giv e them unlimited funds to expand rapidly with no need to make a proﬁt for
y ears while non-Cult companies who need to balance the books cannot compete. Y ou know
that in these circumstances y our Googles, Y ouT ubes, Facebooks and Amazons are going to
secure near monopolies by either crushing or buying up the opposition.
4. Allow freedom of expression on both the Internet and communication platforms to draw
people in until the Internet is the central and irrev ersible pillar of human society and y our
communication corporations hav e reached a stage of near monopoly domination.
5. Then unleash y our alw ays-planned frenzy of censorship on the basis of ‘where else are
y ou going to go?’ and continue to expand that until nothing remains that the Cult does not
w ant its human targets to see.
The process w as timed to hit the ‘Covid’ hoax to ensure the best
chance possible of controlling the narrativ e which they knew they
had to do at all costs. They w ere, a er all, about to unleash a ‘deadly
virus’ that didn’ t really exist. If y ou do that in an environment of
free-ﬂowing information and opinion y ou w ould be dead in thew ater before y ou could say Gates is a psychopath. The netw ork w as
in place through which the Cult-created-and-owned W orld Health
Organization could dictate the ‘Covid’ narrativ e and response policy
slavishly supported by Cult-owned Internet communication giants
and mainstream media while those telling a diﬀerent story w ere
censored. Google, Y ouT ube, Facebook and T wi er openly
announced that they w ould do this. What else w ould w e expect from
Cult-owned operations like Facebook which former executiv es hav e
conﬁrmed set out to make the platform more addictiv e than
cigare es and coldly manipulates emotions of its users to sow
division betw een people and groups and scramble the minds of the
y oung? If Zuckerberg liv es out the rest of his life without going to
jail for crimes against humanity , and most emphatically against the
y oung, it will be a trav esty of justice. Still, no ma er , cause and eﬀect
will catch up with him ev entually and the same with Sergey Brin
and Larry P age at Google with its CEO Sundar Pichai who ﬁx the
Google search results to promote Cult narrativ es and hide the
opposition. Put the same key w ords into Google and other search
engines like DuckDuckGo and y ou will see how diﬀerent results can
be. W ikipedia is another intensely biased ‘encyclopaedia’ which
skews its content to the Cult agenda. Y ouT ube links to W ikipedia’ s
v ersion of ‘Covid’ and ‘climate change’ on video pages in which
experts in their ﬁeld oﬀer a diﬀerent opinion (ev en that is
increasingly rare with W ojcicki censorship). Into this ‘Covid’ silence-
them netw ork must be added gov ernment media censors, sorry
‘regulators’, such as Ofcom in the UK which imposed tyrannical
restrictions on British broadcasters that had the eﬀect of banning me
from ev er appearing. Just to debate with me about my evidence and
views on ‘Covid’ w ould mean breaking the fascistic impositions of
Ofcom and its CEO career gov ernment bureaucrat Melanie Daw es.
Gutless British broadcasters tremble at the v ery thought of fascist
Ofcom.
Psychos behind ‘Covid’The reason for the ‘Covid’ catastrophe in all its facets and forms can
be seen by whom and what is driving the policies w orldwide in such
a coordinated w ay . Decisions are not being made to protect health,
but to target psychology . The dominant group guiding and
‘advising’ gov ernment policy are not medical professionals. They are
psychologists and behavioural scientists. Ev ery major country has its
own v ersion of this phenomenon and I’ll use the British example to
show how it w orks. In many w ays the British v ersion has been
aﬀecting the wider w orld in the form of the huge behaviour
manipulation netw ork in the UK which operates in other countries.
The netw ork inv olv es priv ate companies, gov ernment, intelligence
and military . The Cabinet Oﬃce is at the centre of the gov ernment
‘Covid’ Psy op and part-owns, with ‘innov ation charity’ Nesta, the
Behavioural Insights T eam (BIT) which claims to be independent of
gov ernment but patently isn’ t. The BIT w as established in 2010 and
its job is to manipulate the psyche of the population to acquiesce to
gov ernment demands and so much more. It is also known as the
‘Nudge Unit’, a name inspired by the 2009 book by tw o ultra-
Zionists, Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler , called Nudge: Improving
Decisions About Health, Wealth, and Happiness . The book, as with the
Behavioural Insights T eam, seeks to ‘nudge’ behaviour (manipulate
it) to make the public follow pa erns of action and perception that
suit those in authority (the Cult). Sunstein is so skilled at this that he
advises the W orld Health Organization and the UK Behavioural
Insights T eam and w as Administrator of the White House Oﬃce of
Information and Regulatory Aﬀairs in the Obama administration.
Biden appointed him to the Department of Homeland Security –
another ultra-Zionist in the fold to ov ersee new immigration laws
which is another policy the Cult w ants to control. Sunstein is
desperate to silence any one exposing conspiracies and co-authored a
2008 report on the subject in which suggestions w ere oﬀered to ban
‘conspiracy theorizing’ or impose ‘some kind of tax, ﬁnancial or
otherwise, on those who disseminate such theories’. I guess a
psychiatrist’ s chair is out of the question?Sunstein’ s mate Richard Thaler , an ‘academic aﬃliate’ of the UK
Behavioural Insights T eam, is a proponent of ‘behavioural
economics’ which is deﬁned as the study of ‘the eﬀects of
psychological, cognitiv e, emotional, cultural and social factors on the
decisions of individuals and institutions’. Study the eﬀects so they
can be manipulated to be what y ou w ant them to be. Other leading
names in the dev elopment of behavioural economics are ultra-
Zionists Daniel Kahneman and Robert J. Shiller and they , with
Thaler , w on the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for their
w ork in this ﬁeld. The Behavioural Insights T eam is operating at the
heart of the UK gov ernment and has expanded globally through
partnerships with sev eral univ ersities including Harv ard, Oxford,
Cambridge, Univ ersity College London (UCL) and P ennsylv ania.
They claim to hav e ‘trained’ (reframed) 20,000 civil serv ants and run
more than 750 projects inv olving 400 randomised controlled trials in
dozens of countries’ as another v ersion of mind reframers Common
Purpose. BIT w orks from its oﬃce in New Y ork with cities and their
agencies, as w ell as other partners, across the United States and
Canada – this is a company part-owned by the British gov ernment
Cabinet Oﬃce. An executiv e order by President Cult-serv ant Obama
established a US Social and Behavioral Sciences T eam in 2015. They
all hav e the same reason for being and that’ s to brainw ash the
population directly and by brainw ashing those in positions of
authority .
‘Covid’ mind game
Another prime aspect of the UK mind-control netw ork is the
‘independent’ [joke] Scientiﬁc P andemic Insights Group on
Behaviours (SPI-B) which ‘provides behavioural science advice
aimed at anticipating and helping people adhere to interv entions
that are recommended by medical or epidemiological experts’. That
means manipulating public perception and behaviour to do
whatev er gov ernment tells them to do. It’ s disgusting and if they
really w ant the public to be ‘safe’ this lot should all be under lock
and key . According to the gov ernment w ebsite SPI-B consists of‘behavioural scientists, health and social psychologists,
anthropologists and historians’ and advises the Whi y- V allance-led
Scientiﬁc Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) which in turn
advises the gov ernment on ‘the science’ (it doesn’ t) and ‘Covid’
policy . When politicians say they are being guided by ‘the science’
this is the rabble in each country they are talking about and that
‘science’ is dominated by behaviour manipulators to enforce
gov ernment fascism through public compliance. The Behaviour
Insight T eam is headed by psychologist David Solomon Halpern, a
visiting professor at King’ s College London, and connects with a
national and global w eb of other civilian and military organisations
as the Cult mov es tow ards its goal of fusing them into one fascistic
whole in ev ery country through its ‘Fusion Doctrine’. The behaviour
manipulation netw ork inv olv es, but is not conﬁned to, the Foreign
Oﬃce; National Security Council; gov ernment communications
headquarters (GCHQ); MI5; MI6; the Cabinet Oﬃce-based Media
Monitoring Unit; and the Rapid Response Unit which ‘monitors
digital trends to spot emerging issues; including misinformation and
disinformation; and identiﬁes the best w ay to respond’.
There is also the 77th Brigade of the UK military which operates
like the notorious Israeli military’ s Unit 8200 in manipulating
information and discussion on the Internet by posing as members of
the public to promote the narrativ e and discredit those who
challenge it. Here w e hav e the military seeking to manipulate
domestic  public opinion while the Nazis in gov ernment are ﬁne with
that. Conserv ativ e Member of P arliament T obias Ellw ood, an
adv ocate of lockdown and control through ‘v accine passports’, is a
Lieutenant Colonel reservist in the 77th Brigade which connects with
the military operation jHub, the ‘innov ation centre’ for the Ministry
of Defence and Strategic Command. jHub has also been inv olv ed
with the civilian National Health Service (NHS) in ‘symptom
tracing’ the population. The NHS is a key part of this mind control
netw ork and produced a document in December , 2020, explaining to
staﬀ how to use psychological manipulation with diﬀerent groups
and ages to get them to hav e the DNA-manipulating ‘Covid v accine’that’ s designed to cumulativ ely rewrite human genetics. The
document, called ‘Optimising V accination Roll Out – Do’ s and Dont’ s
for all messaging, documents and “communications” in the widest
sense’, w as published by NHS England and the NHS Improv ement
Behaviour Change Unit  in partnership with Public Health England
and W arwick Business School. I hear the mantra about ‘sav e the
NHS’ and ‘protect the NHS’ when w e need to scrap the NHS and
start again. The current v ersion is far too corrupt, far too anti-human
and totally compromised by Cult operativ es and their assets. UK
gov ernment broadcast media censor Ofcom will connect into this
w eb – as will the BBC with its tremendous Ofcom inﬂuence – to
control what the public see and hear and dictate mass perception.
Nuremberg trials must include personnel from all these
organisations.
The fear factor
The ‘Covid’ hoax has led to the creation of the UK Cabinet Oﬃce-
connected Joint Biosecurity Centre ( JBC) which is oﬃcially described
as providing ‘expert advice on pandemics’ using its independent [all
Cult operations are ‘independent’] analytical function to provide
real-time analysis about infection outbreaks to identify and respond
to outbreaks of Covid-19’. Another role is to advise the gov ernment
on a response to spikes in infections – ‘for example by closing
schools or w orkplaces in local areas where infection lev els hav e
risen’. Put another w ay , promoting the Cult agenda. The Joint
Biosecurity Centre is modelled on the Joint T errorism Analysis
Centre which analyses intelligence to set ‘terrorism threat lev els’ and
here again y ou see the fusion of civilian and military operations and
intelligence that has led to military intelligence producing
documents about ‘v accine hesitancy’ and how it can be combated.
Domestic civilian ma ers and opinions should not be the business of
the military . The Joint Biosecurity Centre is headed by T om Hurd,
director general of the Oﬃce for Security and Counter - T errorism
from the establishment-to-its-ﬁngertips Hurd family . His father is
former Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd. How coincidental that T om•
•
•
•Hurd w ent to the elite Eton College and Oxford Univ ersity with
Boris Johnson. Imperial College with its ridiculous computer
modeller Neil Ferguson will connect with this gigantic w eb that will
itself interconnect with similar set-ups in other major and not so
major countries. Compared with this Cult netw ork the politicians, be
they Boris Johnson, Donald T rump or Joe Biden, are bit-part play ers
‘following the science’. The netw ork of psychologists w as on the
‘Covid’ case from the start with the aim of generating maximum fear
of the ‘virus’ to ensure compliance by the population. A gov ernment
behavioural science group known as SPI-B produced a paper in
March, 2020, for discussion by the main gov ernment science
advisory group known as SAGE. It w as headed ‘Options for
increasing adherence to social distancing measures’ and it said the
following in a section headed ‘P ersuasion’:
A substantial number of people still do not feel suﬃciently
personally threatened; it could be that they are reassured by the
low death rate in their demographic group, although lev els of
concern may be rising. Having a good understanding of the risk
has been found to be positiv ely associated with adoption of
COVID-19 social distancing measures in Hong Kong.
The perceiv ed lev el of personal threat needs to be increased
among those who are complacent, using hard-hi ing ev aluation
of options for increasing social distancing emotional messaging.
T o be eﬀectiv e this must also empow er people by making clear
the actions they can take to reduce the threat.
Responsibility to others: There seems to be insuﬃcient
understanding of, or feelings of responsibility about, people’ s role
in transmi ing the infection to others … Messaging about actions
need to be framed positiv ely in terms of protecting oneself and
the community , and increase conﬁdence that they will be eﬀectiv e.
Some people will be more persuaded by appeals to play by the
rules, some by duty to the community , and some to personal risk.All these diﬀerent approaches are needed. The messaging also
needs to take account of the realities of diﬀerent people’ s liv es.
Messaging needs to take account of the diﬀerent motiv ational
lev ers and circumstances of diﬀerent people.
All this could be achiev ed the SPI-B psychologists said by using the
media to increase the sense of personal threat  which translates as terrify
the shit out of the population, including children, so they all do what
w e w ant. That’ s not happened has it? Those excuses for ‘journalists’
who w ouldn’ t know journalism if it bit them on the arse (the great
majority) hav e play ed their crucial part in serving this Cult-
gov ernment Psy op to enslav e their own kids and grandkids. How
they liv e with themselv es I hav e no idea. The psychological w ar has
been underpinned by constant gov ernment ‘Covid’ propaganda in
almost ev ery television and radio ad break, plus the Internet and
print media, which has pounded out the fear with taxpay ers footing
the bill for their own programming. The result has been people
terriﬁed of a ‘virus’ that doesn’ t exist or one with a tiny fatality rate
ev en if y ou believ e it does. P eople w alk down the street and around
the shops w earing face-nappies damaging their health and
psychology while others report those who refuse to be that naïv e to
the police who turn up in their own face-nappies. I had a cameraman
come to my ﬂat and he w as so frightened of ‘Covid’ he came in
w earing a mask and refused to shake my hand in case he caught
something. He had – naïv eitis – and the thought that he w orked in
the mainstream media w as both depressing and made his behaviour
perfectly explainable. The fear which has gripped the minds of so
many and frozen them into compliance has been carefully cultiv ated
by these psychologists who are really psychopaths. If liv es get
destroy ed and a lot of y oung people commit suicide it shows our
plan is w orking. SPI-B then turned to compulsion on the public to
comply . ‘W ith adequate preparation, rapid change can be achiev ed’,
it said. Some countries had introduced mandatory self-isolation on a
wide scale without evidence of major public unrest and a large
majority of the UK’ s population appeared to be supportiv e of more
coerciv e measures with 64 percent of adults saying they w ouldsupport pu ing London under a lockdown (w atch the ‘polls’ which
are designed to make people believ e that public opinion is in fav our
or against whatev er the subject in hand).
For ‘aggressiv e protectiv e measures’ to be eﬀectiv e, the SPI-B
paper said, special a ention should be dev oted to those population
groups that are more at risk. T ranslated from the Orw ellian this
means making the rest of population feel guilty for not protecting
the ‘vulnerable’ such as old people which the Cult and its agencies
w ere about to kill on an industrial scale with lockdown, lack of
treatment and the Gates ‘v accine’. Psychopath psychologists sold
their guilt-trip so comprehensiv ely that Los Angeles County
Supervisor Hilda Solis reported that children w ere apologising (from
a distance) to their parents and grandparents for bringing ‘Covid’
into their homes and ge ing them sick. ‘… These apologies are just
some of the last w ords that lov ed ones will ev er hear as they die
alone,’ she said. Gut-wrenchingly Solis then used this childhood
tragedy to tell children to stay at home and ‘keep y our lov ed ones
aliv e’. Imagine heaping such potentially life-long guilt on a kid when
it has absolutely nothing to do with them. These people are deeply
disturbed and the psychologists behind this ev en more so.
Uncivil war – divide and rule
Professional mind-controllers at SPI-B w anted the media to increase
a sense of responsibility to others (do as y ou’ re told) and promote
‘positiv e messaging’ for those actions while in contrast to inv oke
‘social disapprov al’ by the unquestioning, obedient, community of
any one with a mind of their own. Again the compliant Goebbels-like
media obliged. This is an old, old, trick employ ed by tyrannies the
w orld ov er throughout human history . Y ou get the target population
to keep the target population in line – your  line. SPI-B said this could
‘play an important role in prev enting anti-social behaviour or
discouraging failure to enact pro-social behaviour ’. For ‘anti-social’
in the Orw ellian parlance of SPI-B see any behaviour that
gov ernment doesn’ t approv e. SPI-B recommendations said that
‘social disapprov al’ should be accompanied by clear messaging andpromotion of strong collectiv e identity – hence the gov ernment and
celebrity mantra of ‘w e’ re all in this together ’. Sure w e are. The mind
doctors hav e such contempt for their targets that they think some
clueless comedian, actor or singer telling them to do what the
gov ernment w ants will be enough to win them ov er . W e hav e had
UK comedian Lenny Henry , actor Michael Caine and singer Elton
John wheeled out to serv e the propagandists by urging people to
hav e the DNA-manipulating ‘Covid’ non-’v accine’. The role of
Henry and fellow black celebrities in seeking to coax a ‘v accine’
reluctant black community into doing the gov ernment’ s will w as
especially stomach-turning. An emotion-manipulating script and
carefully edited video featuring these black ‘celebs’ w as such an
insult to the intelligence of black people and where’ s the self-respect
of those inv olv ed selling their souls to a fascist gov ernment agenda?
Henry said he heard black people’ s ‘legitimate w orries and
concerns’, but people must ‘trust the facts’ when they w ere doing
exactly that by not having the ‘v accine’. They had to include the
obligatory reference to Black Liv es Ma er with the line … ‘Don’ t let
coronavirus cost ev en more black liv es – because w e ma er ’. My
god, it w as pathetic. ‘I know the v accine is safe and what it does.’
How? ‘I’ m a comedian and it says so in my script.’
SPI-B said social disapprov al needed to be carefully managed to
av oid victimisation, scapegoating and misdirected criticism, but they
knew that their ‘recommendations’ w ould lead to exactly that and
the media w ere speciﬁcally used to stir -up the divide-and-conquer
hostility . Those who conform like good li le baa, baas, are praised
while those who hav e seen through the tidal w av e of lies are
‘Covidiots’. The aw ake hav e been abused by the fast asleep for not
conforming to fascism and impositions that the aw ake know are
designed to endanger their health, dehumanise them, and tear
asunder the v ery fabric of human society . W e hav e had the curtain-
twitchers and morons reporting neighbours and others to the face-
nappied police for breaking ‘Covid rules’ with fascist police
delighting in posting links and phone numbers where this could be
done. The Cult cannot impose its will without a compliant policeand military or a compliant population willing to play their part in
enslaving themselv es and their kids. The w ords of a pastor in Nazi
Germany are so appropriate today:
First they came for the socialists and I did not speak out because I was not a socialist.
Then they came for the trade unionists and I did not speak out because I was not a trade
unionist.
Then they came for the Jews and I did not speak out because I was not a Jew.
Then they came for me and there was no one left to speak for me.
Those who don’ t learn from history are destined to repeat it and so
many are.
‘Covid’ rules: Rewiring the mind
W ith the background laid out to this gigantic national and global
w eb of psychological manipulation w e can put ‘Covid’ rules into a
clear and sinister perspectiv e. Forget the claims about protecting
health. ‘Covid’ rules are about dismantling the human mind,
breaking the human spirit, destroying self-respect, and then pu ing
Humpty Dumpty together again as a servile, submissiv e slav e. Social
isolation through lockdown and distancing hav e dev astating eﬀects
on the human psyche as the psychological psychopaths w ell know
and that’ s the real reason for them. Humans need contact with each
other , discourse, closeness and touch, or they ev entually , and
literarily , go crazy . Masks, which I will address at some length,
fundamentally add to the eﬀects of isolation and the Cult agenda to
dehumanise and de-individualise the population. T o do this while
knowing – in fact seeking  – this outcome is the v ery epitome of evil
and psychologists inv olv ed in this are  the epitome of evil. They must
like all the rest of the Cult demons and their assets stand trial for
crimes against humanity on a scale that deﬁes the imagination.
Psychopaths in uniform use isolation to break enemy troops and
agents and make them subservient and submissiv e to tell what they
know . The technique is rightly considered a form of torture andtorture is most certainly what has been imposed on the human
population.
Clinically-insane American psychologist Harry Harlow became
famous for his isolation experiments in the 1950s in which he
separated baby monkeys from their mothers and imprisoned them
for months on end in a metal container or ‘pit of despair ’. They soon
began to show mental distress and depression as any idiot could
hav e predicted. Harlow put other monkeys in steel chambers for
three, six or tw elv e months while denying them any contact with
animals or humans. He said that the eﬀects of total social isolation
for six months w ere ‘so dev astating and debilitating that w e had
assumed initially that tw elv e months of isolation w ould not produce
any additional decrement’; but tw elv e months of isolation ‘almost
obliterated the animals socially’. This is what the Cult and its
psychopaths are doing to y ou and y our children. Ev en monkeys in
partial isolation in which they w ere not allow ed to form
relationships with other monkeys became ‘aggressiv e and hostile,
not only to others, but also tow ards their own bodies’. W e hav e seen
this in the y oung as a consequence of lockdown. UK gov ernment
psychopaths launched a public relations campaign telling people not
to hug each other ev en a er they receiv ed the ‘Covid-19 v accine’
which w e w ere told with more lies w ould allow a return to ‘normal
life’. A gov ernment source told The Telegraph : ‘It will be along the
lines that it is great that y ou hav e been v accinated, but if y ou are
going to visit y our family and hug y our grandchildren there is a
chance y ou are going to infect people y ou lov e.’ The source w as
apparently speaking from a secure psychiatric facility . Janet Lord,
director of Birmingham Univ ersity’ s Institute of Inﬂammation and
Ageing, said that parents and grandparents should av oid hugging
their children. W ell, how can I put it, Ms Lord? Fuck oﬀ. Y ep, that’ll
do.
Destroying the kids – where are the parents?
Observ e what has happened to people enslav ed and isolated by
lockdown as suicide and self-harm has soared w orldwide,particularly among the y oung denied the freedom to associate with
their friends. A study of 49,000 people in English-speaking countries
concluded that almost half of y oung adults are at clinical risk of
mental health disorders. A national surv ey in America of 1,000
currently enrolled high school and college students found that 5
percent reported a empting suicide during the pandemic. Data from
the US CDC’ s National Syndromic Surv eillance Program from
January 1st to October 17th, 2020, rev ealed a 31 percent  increase in
mental health issues among adolescents aged 12 to 17 compared
with 2019. The CDC reported that America in general suﬀered the
biggest drop in life expectancy since W orld W ar T w o as it fell by a
y ear in the ﬁrst half of 2020 as a result of ‘deaths of despair ’ –
ov erdoses and suicides. Deaths of despair hav e leapt by more than
20 percent during lockdown and include the highest number of fatal
ov erdoses ev er recorded in a single y ear – 81,000. Internet addiction
is another consequence of being isolated at home which low ers
interest in physical activities as kids fall into inertia and what’ s the
point? Children and y oung people are losing hope and giving up on
life, sometimes literally . A 14-y ear -old boy killed himself in
Maryland because he had ‘giv en up’ when his school district didn’ t
reopen; an 11-y ear -old boy shot himself during a zoom class; a
teenager in Maine succumbed to the isolation of the ‘pandemic’
when he ended his life a er experiencing a disrupted senior y ear at
school. Children as y oung as nine hav e taken their life and all these
stories can be repeated around the w orld. Careers are being
destroy ed before they start and that includes those in sport in which
promising y oungsters hav e not been able to take part. The plan of
the psycho-psychologists is w orking all right. Researchers at
Cambridge Univ ersity found that lockdowns cause signiﬁcant harm
to children’ s mental health. Their study w as published in the
Archives of Disease in Childhood , and follow ed 168 children aged
betw een 7 and 11. The researchers concluded:
During the UK lockdown, children’s depression symptoms have increased substantially,
relative to before lockdown. The scale of this effect has direct relevance for the continuation
of different elements of lockdown policy, such as complete or partial school closures …… Specifically, we observed a statistically significant increase in ratings of depression, with a
medium-to-large effect size. Our findings emphasise the need to incorporate the potential
impact of lockdown on child mental health in planning the ongoing response to the global
pandemic and the recovery from it.
Not a chance when the Cult’ s psycho-psychologists w ere ge ing
exactly what they w anted. The UK’ s Roy al College of P aediatrics and
Child Health has urged parents to look for signs of eating disorders
in children and y oung people a er a three to four fold increase.
Specialists say the ‘pandemic’ is a major reason behind the rise. Y ou
don’ t say . The College said isolation from friends during school
closures, exam cancellations, loss of extra-curricular activities like
sport, and an increased use of social media w ere all contributory
factors along with fears about the virus (psycho-psychologists
again), family ﬁnances, and students being forced to quarantine.
Doctors said y oung people w ere becoming sev erely ill by the time
they w ere seen with ‘Covid’ regulations reducing face-to-face
consultations. Nor is it only the y oung that hav e been dev astated by
the psychopaths. Like all bullies and cow ards the Cult is targeting
the y oung, elderly , w eak and inﬁrm. A typical story w as told by a
British lady called L ynn P arker who w as not allow ed to visit her
husband in 2020 for the last ten and half months of his life ‘when he
needed me most’ betw een March 20th and when he died on
December 19th. This v acates the criminal and enters the territory of
evil. The emotional impact on the immune system alone is immense
as are the number of people of all ages w orldwide who hav e died as
a result of Cult-demanded, Gates-demanded, lockdowns.
Isolation is torture
The experience of imposing solitary conﬁnement on millions of
prisoners around the w orld has shown how a large percentage
become ‘activ ely psychotic and/or acutely suicidal’. Social isolation
has been found to trigger ‘a speciﬁc psychiatric syndrome,
characterized by hallucinations; panic a acks; ov ert paranoia;
diminished impulse control; hypersensitivity to external stimuli; and
diﬃculties with thinking, concentration and memory’. Juan Mendez,a United Nations rapporteur (inv estigator), said that isolation is a
form of torture. Research has shown that ev en a er isolation
prisoners ﬁnd it far more diﬃcult to make social connections and I
remember cha ing to a shop assistant a er one lockdown who told
me that when her y oung son met another child again he had no idea
how to act or what to do. Hannah Flanagan, Director of Emergency
Services at Journey Mental Health Center in Dane County ,
W isconsin, said: ‘The speciﬁcity about Covid social distancing and
isolation that w e’v e come across as contributing factors to the
suicides are really new to us this y ear .’ But they are not new to those
that devised them. They are ge ing the eﬀect they w ant as the
population is psychologically dismantled to be rebuilt in a totally
diﬀerent w ay . Children and the y oung are particularly targeted.
They will be the adults when the full-on fascist AI-controlled
technocracy is planned to be imposed and they are being prepared
to meekly submit. At the same time older people who still hav e a
memory of what life w as like before – and how fascist the new
normal really is – are being deleted. Y ou are going to see eﬀorts to
turn the y oung against the old to support this geriatric genocide.
Hannah Flanagan said the big increase in suicide in her county
prov ed that social isolation is not only harmful, but deadly . Studies
hav e shown that isolation from others is one of the main risk factors
in suicide and ev en more so with w omen. W arnings that lockdown
could create a ‘perfect storm’ for suicide w ere ignored. A er all this
w as one of the reasons  for lockdown. Suicide, how ev er , is only the
most extreme of isolation consequences. There are many others. Dr
Dhruv Khullar , assistant professor of healthcare policy at W eill
Cornell Medical College, said in a New York Times  article in 2016 long
before the fake ‘pandemic’:
A wave of new research suggests social separation is bad for us. Individuals with less social
connection have disrupted sleep patterns, altered immune systems, more inflammation and
higher levels of stress hormones. One recent study found that isolation increases the risk of
heart disease by 29 percent and stroke by 32 percent. Another analysis that pooled data from
70 studies and 3.4 million people found that socially isolated individuals had a 30 percent
higher risk of dying in the next seven years, and that this effect was largest in middle age.Loneliness can accelerate cognitive decline in older adults, and isolated individuals are twice
as likely to die prematurely as those with more robust social interactions. These effects start
early: Socially isolated children have significantly poorer health 20 years later, even after
controlling for other factors. All told, loneliness is as important a risk factor for early death as
obesity and smoking.
There y ou hav e proof from that one article alone four y ears before
2020 that those who hav e enforced lockdown, social distancing and
isolation knew what the eﬀect w ould be and that is ev en more so
with professional psychologists that hav e been driving the policy
across the globe. W e can go back ev en further to the y ears 2000 and
2003 and the start of a major study on the eﬀects of isolation on
health by Dr Janine Gronew old and Professor Dirk M. Hermann at
the Univ ersity Hospital in Essen, Germany , who analysed data on
4,316 people with an av erage age of 59 who w ere recruited for the
long-term research project. They found that socially isolated people
are more than 40 percent more likely to hav e a heart a ack, stroke,
or other major cardiov ascular ev ent and nearly 50 percent more
likely to die from any cause. Giv en the ﬁnancial Armageddon
unleashed by lockdown w e should note that the study found a
relationship betw een increased cardiov ascular risk and lack of
ﬁnancial support. A er excluding other factors social isolation w as
still connected to a 44 percent increased risk of cardiov ascular
problems and a 47 percent increased risk of death by any cause. Lack
of ﬁnancial support w as associated with a 30 percent increase in the
risk of cardiov ascular health ev ents. Dr Gronew old said it had been
known for some time that feeling lonely or lacking contact with close
friends and family can hav e an impact on physical health and the
study had shown that having strong social relationships is of high
importance for heart health. Gronew old said they didn’ t understand
y et why people who are socially isolated hav e such poor health
outcomes, but this w as obviously a w orrying ﬁnding, particularly
during these times of prolonged social distancing. W ell, it can be
explained on many lev els. Y ou only hav e to identify the point in the
body where people feel loneliness and missing people they are
parted from – it’ s in the centre of the chest where they feel the ache
of loneliness and the ache of missing people. ‘My heart aches fory ou’ … ‘My heart aches for some company .’ I will explain this more
in the chapter Escaping W etiko, but when y ou realise that the body
is the mind – they are expressions of each other – the reason why
state of the mind dictates state of the body becomes clear .
American psychologist Ranjit P ow ar w as highlighting the eﬀects
of lockdown isolation as early as April, 2020. She said humans hav e
ev olv ed to be social creatures and are wired to liv e in interactiv e
groups. Being isolated from family , friends and colleagues could be
unbalancing and traumatic for most people and could result in short
or ev en long-term psychological and physical health problems. An
increase in lev els of anxiety , aggression, depression, forgetfulness
and hallucinations w ere possible psychological eﬀects of isolation.
‘Mental conditions may be precipitated for those with underlying
pre-existing susceptibilities and show up in many others without
any pre-condition.’ P ow ar said personal relationships helped us cope
with stress and if w e lost this outlet for le ing oﬀ steam the result
can be a big emotional v oid which, for an av erage person, w as
diﬃcult to deal with. ‘Just a few days of isolation can cause
increased lev els of anxiety and depression’ – so what the hell has
been the eﬀect on the global population of 18 months  of this at the
time of writing? P ow ar said: ‘ Add to it the looming threat of a
dreadful disease being repeatedly hammered in through the media
and y ou hav e a recipe for many shades of mental and physical
distress.’ For those with a house and a garden it is easy to forget that
billions hav e had to endure lockdown isolation in tiny ov ercrowded
ﬂats and apartments with nowhere to go outside. The psychological
and physical consequences of this are unimaginable and with lunatic
and abusiv e partners and parents the consequences hav e led to
tremendous increases in domestic and child abuse and alcoholism as
people seek to shut out the horror . Ranjit P ow ar said:
Staying in a confined space with family is not all a rosy picture for everyone. It can be
extremely oppressive and claustrophobic for large low-income families huddled together in
small single-room houses. Children here are not lucky enough to have many board/electronic
games or books to keep them occupied.Add to it the deep insecurity of running out of funds for food and basic necessities. On the
other hand, there are people with dysfunctional family dynamics, such as domineering,
abusive or alcoholic partners, siblings or parents which makes staying home a period of trial.
Incidence of suicide and physical abuse against women has shown a worldwide increase.
Heightened anxiety and depression also affect a person’s immune system, making them more
susceptible to illness.
T o think that P ow ar ’ s article w as published on April 11th, 2020.
Six-feet fantasy
Social (unsocial) distancing demanded that people stay six feet or
tw o metres apart. UK gov ernment advisor Robert Dingw all from the
New and Emerging Respiratory V irus Threats Advisory Group said
in a radio interview that the tw o-metre rule w as ‘conjured up out of
nowhere’ and w as not based on science. No, it w as not based on
medical  science, but it didn’ t come out of nowhere. The distance
related to psychological  science. Six feet/tw o metres w as adopted in
many countries and w e w ere told by people like the criminal
Anthony Fauci and his ilk that it w as founded on science. Many
schools could not reopen because they did not hav e the space for six-
feet distancing. Then in March, 2021, a er a y ear of six-feet ‘science’,
a study published in the Journal of Infectious Diseases  inv olving more
than 500,000 students and almost 100,000 staﬀ ov er 16 w eeks
rev ealed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in ‘Covid’ cases betw een six feet
and three feet and Fauci changed his tune. Now three feet w as okay .
There is no diﬀerence betw een six feet and three inches  when there is
no ‘virus’ and they got aw ay with six feet for psychological reasons
for as long as they could. I hear journalists and others talk about
‘unintended consequences’ of lockdown. They are not unintended  at
all; they hav e been coldly-calculated for a speciﬁc outcome of human
control and that’ s why super -psychopaths like Gates hav e called for
them so v ehemently . Super -psychopath psychologists hav e
demanded them and psychopathic or clueless, spineless, politicians
hav e gone along with them by ‘following the science’. But it’ s not
science at all. ‘Science’ is not what is; it’ s only what people can be
manipulated to believ e it is. The whole ‘Covid’ catastrophe isfounded on mind control. Three w ord or three statement mantras
issued by the UK gov ernment are a w ell-known mind control
technique and so w e’v e had ‘Stay home/protect the NHS/sav e liv es’,
‘Stay alert/control the virus/sav e liv es’ and ‘hands/face/space’. One
of the most v ocal proponents of extreme ‘Covid’ rules in the UK has
been Professor Susan Michie, a member of the British Communist
P arty , who is not a medical professional. Michie is the director of the
Centre for Behaviour Change at Univ ersity College London. She is a
behavioural psychologist  and another ﬁlthy rich ‘Marxist’ who praised
China’ s draconian lockdown. She w as known by fellow students at
Oxford Univ ersity as ‘Stalin’ s nanny’ for her extreme Marxism.
Michie is an inﬂuential member of the UK gov ernment’ s Scientiﬁc
Advisory Group for Emergencies (SAGE) and behavioural
manipulation groups which hav e dominated ‘Covid’ policy . She is a
consultant adviser to the W orld Health Organization on ‘Covid-19’
and behaviour . Why the hell are lockdowns anything to do with her
when they are claimed to be about health? Why does a behavioural
psychologist from a group charged with changing the behaviour of
the public w ant lockdown, human isolation and mandatory masks?
Does that question really need an answ er? Michie absolutely  has to
explain herself before a Nuremberg court when humanity takes back
its w orld again and ev en more so when y ou see the consequences of
masks that she demands are compulsory . This is a Michie classic:
The benefits of getting primary school children to wear masks is that regardless of what little
degree of transmission is occurring in those age groups it could help normalise the practice.
Young children wearing masks may be more likely to get their families to accept masks.
Those w ords alone should carry a prison sentence when y ou
ponder on the callous disregard for children inv olv ed and what a
statement it makes about the mind and motiv ations of Susan Michie.
What a lov ely lady and what she said there encapsulates the
mentality of the psychopaths behind the ‘Covid’ horror . Let us
compare what Michie said with a countrywide study in Germany
published at researchsquare.com  inv olving 25,000 school children
and 17,854 health complaints submi ed by parents. Researchersfound that masks are harming children physically , psychologically ,
and behaviourally with 24 health issues associated with mask
w earing. They include: shortness of breath (29.7%); dizziness
(26.4%); increased headaches (53%); diﬃculty concentrating (50%);
drowsiness or fatigue (37%); and malaise (42%). Nearly a third of
children experienced more sleep issues than before and a quarter
dev eloped new fears. Researchers found health issues and other
impairments in 68 percent of masked children cov ering their faces
for an av erage of 4.5 hours a day . Hundreds of those taking part
experienced accelerated respiration, tightness in the chest, w eakness,
and short-term impairment of consciousness. A reminder of what
Michie said again:
The benefits of getting primary school children to wear masks is that regardless of what little
degree of transmission is occurring in those age groups it could help normalise the practice.
Young children wearing masks may be more likely to get their families to accept masks.
Psychopaths in gov ernment and psychology now hav e children and
y oung people – plus all the adults – w earing masks for hours on end
while clueless teachers impose the will of the psychopaths on the
y oung they should be protecting. What the hell are parents doing?
Cult lab rats
W e hav e some schools already imposing on students microchipped
buzzers that activ ate when they get ‘too close’ to their pals in the
w ay they do with lab rats. How apt. T o the Cult and its brain-dead
serv ants our children are  lab rats being conditioned to be
unquestioning, dehumanised slav es for the rest of their liv es.
Children and y oung people are being w eaned and frightened aw ay
from the most natural human instincts including closeness and
touch. I hav e tracked in the books ov er the y ears how schools w ere
banning pupils from greeting each other with a hug and the whole
Cult-induced Me T oo mov ement has terriﬁed men and boys from a
relaxed and natural interaction with female friends and w ork
colleagues to the point where many men try nev er to be in a roomalone with a w oman that’ s not their partner . Airhead celebrities hav e
as alw ays play ed their virtue-signalling part in making this happen
with their gross exaggeration. For ev ery monster like Harv ey
W einstein there are at least tens of thousands of men that don’ t treat
w omen like that; but ev ery one must be branded the same and policy
changed for them as w ell as the monster . I am going to be using the
w ord ‘dehumanise’ many times in this chapter because that is what
the Cult is seeking to do and it goes v ery deep as w e shall see. Don’ t
let them kid y ou that social distancing is planned to end one day .
That’ s not the idea. W e are seeing more gov ernments and companies
funding and producing w earable gadgets to keep people apart and
they w ould not be doing that if this w as meant to be short-term. A
tech start-up company backed by GCHQ, the British Intelligence and
military surv eillance headquarters, has created a social distancing
wrist sensor that alerts people when they get too close to others. The
CIA has also supported tech companies dev eloping similar devices.
The w earable sensor w as dev eloped by T ended, one of a number of
start-up companies supported by GCHQ (see the CIA and DARP A).
The device can be w orn on the wrist or as a tag on the w aistband and
will vibrate whenev er someone w earing the device breaches social
distancing and gets anywhere near natural human contact. The
company had a lucky break in that it w as dev eloping a distancing
sensor when the ‘Covid’ hoax arriv ed which immediately provided a
potentially enormous market. How fortunate. The gov ernment in
big-time Cult-controlled Ontario in Canada is inv esting $2.5 million
in w earable contact tracing technology that ‘will alert users if they
may hav e been exposed to the Covid-19 in the w orkplace and will
beep or vibrate if they are within six feet of another person’.
Facedriv e Inc., the technology company behind this, w as founded in
2016 with funding from the Ontario T ogether Fund and obviously
they , too, had a prophet on the board of directors. The human
surv eillance and control technology is called T raceSCAN and w ould
be w orn by the human cyborgs in places such as airports,
w orkplaces, construction sites, care homes and … schools .I emphasise schools with children and y oung people the prime
targets. Y ou know what is planned for society as a whole if y ou keep
y our ey es on the schools. They hav e alw ays been places where the
state program the next generation of slav es to be its compliant
w orker -ants – or W oker -ants these days; but in the mist of the
‘Covid’ madness they hav e been transformed into mind laboratories
on a scale nev er seen before. T eachers and head teachers are just as
programmed as the kids – o en more so. Children are kept apart
from human interaction by w alk lanes, classroom distancing,
staggered meal times, masks, and the rolling-out of buzzer systems.
Schools are now physically laid out as a laboratory maze for lab-rats.
Lunatics at a school in Anchorage, Alaska, who should be
prosecuted for child abuse, took aw ay desks and forced children to
kneel (know y our place) on a mat for ﬁv e hours a day while w earing
a mask and using their chairs as a desk. How this w as supposed to
impact on a ‘virus’ only these clinically insane people can tell y ou
and ev en then it w ould be clap-trap. The school banned recess
(interaction), art classes (creativity), and physical exercise (ge ing
body and mind moving out of inertia). Ev ery one behind this outrage
should be in jail or be er still a mental institution. The behavioural
manipulators are all for this dystopian approach to schools.
Professor Susan Michie, the mind-doctor and British Communist
P arty member , said it w as wrong to say that schools w ere safe. They
had to be made so by ‘distancing’, masks and v entilation (si ing all
day in the cold). I must ask this lady round for dinner on a night I
know I am going to be out and not back for w eeks. She probably
w ouldn’ t be able to make it, anyw ay , with all the visits to her own
psychologist she must hav e block-booked.
Masking identity
I know how shocking it must be for y ou that a behaviour
manipulator like Michie w ants ev ery one to w ear masks which hav e
long been a feature of mind-control programs like the infamous
MKUltra in the United States, but, there w e are. W e liv e and learn. I
spent many y ears from 1996 to right across the millenniumresearching mind control in detail on both sides of the Atlantic and
elsewhere. I met a large number of mind-control surviv ors and
many had been held captiv e in body and mind by MKUltra. MK
stands for mind-control, but employs the German spelling in
deference to the Nazis spirited out of Germany at the end of W orld
W ar T w o by Operation P aperclip in which the US authorities, with
help from the V atican, transported Nazi mind-controllers and
engineers to America to continue their w ork. Many of them w ere
behind the creation of NASA and they included Nazi scientist and
SS oﬃcer W ernher v on Braun who sw apped designing V -2 rockets to
bombard London with designing the Saturn V rockets that pow ered
the NASA moon programme’ s Apollo cra . I think I may hav e
mentioned that the Cult has no borders. Among P aperclip escapees
w as Josef Mengele, the Angel of Death in the Nazi concentration
camps where he conducted mind and genetic experiments on
children o en using twins to provide a control twin to measure the
impact of his ‘w ork’ on the other . If y ou w ant to observ e the Cult
mentality in all its extremes of evil then look into the life of Mengele.
I hav e met many people who suﬀered mercilessly under Mengele in
the United States where he operated under the name Dr Greene and
became a stalw art of MKUltra programming and torture. Among his
locations w as the underground facility in the Mojav e Desert in
California called the China Lake Nav al W eapons Station which is
almost entirely below the surface. My books The Biggest Secret,
Children of the Matrix  and The Perception Deception  hav e the detailed
background to MKUltra.
The best-known MKUltra surviv or is American Cathy O’Brien. I
ﬁrst met her and her late partner Mark Phillips at a conference in
Colorado in 1996. Mark helped her escape and deprogram from
decades of captivity in an oﬀshoot of MKUltra known as Project
Monarch in which ‘sex slav es’ w ere provided for the rich and
famous including Father George Bush, Dick Cheney and the
Clintons. Read Cathy and Mark’ s book Trance-Formation of America
and if y ou are new to this y ou will be shocked to the core. I read it in
1996 shortly before, with the usual synchronicity of my life, I foundmyself giv en a book table at the conference right next to hers.
MKUltra nev er ended despite being v ery publicly exposed (only a
small part of it) in the 1970s and continues in other guises. I am still
in touch with Cathy . She contacted me during 2020 a er masks
became compulsory in many countries to tell me how they w ere
used as part of MKUltra programming. I had been observing ‘Covid
regulations’ and the relationship betw een authority and public for
months. I saw techniques that I knew w ere employ ed on individuals
in MKUltra being used on the global population. I had read many
books and manuals on mind control including one called Silent
Weapons for  Quiet Wars  which came to light in the 1980s and w as a
guide on how to perceptually program on a mass scale. ‘Silent
W eapons’ refers to mind-control. I remembered a line from the
manual as gov ernments, medical authorities and law enforcement
agencies hav e so obviously talked to – or rather at – the adult
population since the ‘Covid’ hoax began as if they are children. The
document said:
If a person is spoken to by a T.V. advertiser as if he were a twelve-year-old, then, due to
suggestibility, he will, with a certain probability, respond or react to that suggestion with the
uncritical response of a twelve-year-old and will reach in to his economic reservoir and
deliver its energy to buy that product on impulse when he passes it in the store.
That’ s why authority has spoken to adults like children since all this
began.
Why did Michael Jackson wear masks?
Ev ery aspect of the ‘Covid’ narrativ e has mind-control as its central
theme. Cathy O’Brien wrote an article for davidicke.com  about the
connection betw een masks and mind control. Her daughter Kelly
who I ﬁrst met in the 1990s w as born while Cathy w as still held
captiv e in MKUltra. Kelly w as forced to w ear a mask as part of her
programming from the age of two  to dehumanise her , target her
sense of individuality and reduce the amount of oxygen her brain
and body receiv ed. Bingo . This is the real reason for compulsorymasks, why they hav e been enforced en masse, and why they seek to
increase the number they demand y ou w ear . First one, then tw o,
with one disgraceful alleged ‘doctor ’ recommending four which is
nothing less than a death sentence. Where and how o en they must
be w orn is being expanded for the purpose of mass mind control
and damaging respiratory health which they can call ‘Covid-19’.
Canada’ s gov ernment headed by the man-child Justin T rudeau, says
it’ s ﬁne for children of tw o and older to w ear masks. An insane
‘study’ in Italy inv olving just 47 children concluded there w as no
problem for babies as y oung as four months  w earing them. Ev en a er
people w ere ‘v accinated’ they w ere still told to w ear masks by the
criminal that is Anthony Fauci. Cathy wrote that mandating masks
is allowing the authorities literally to control the air w e breathe
which is what w as done in MKUltra. Y ou might recall how the
singer Michael Jackson w ore masks and there is a reason for that. He
w as subjected to MKUltra mind control through Project Monarch
and his psyche w as scrambled by these simpletons. Cathy wrote:
In MKUltra Project Monarch mind control, Michael Jackson had to wear a mask to silence his
voice so he could not reach out for help. Remember how he developed that whisper voice
when he wasn’t singing? Masks control the mind from the outside in, like the redefining of
words is doing. By controlling what we can and cannot say for fear of being labeled racist or
beaten, for example, it ultimately controls thought that drives our words and ultimately actions
(or lack thereof).
Likewise, a mask muffles our speech so that we are not heard, which controls voice … words
… mind. This is Mind Control. Masks are an obvious mind control device, and I am disturbed
so many people are complying on a global scale. Masks depersonalize while making a person
feel as though they have no voice. It is a barrier to others. People who would never choose to
comply but are forced to wear a mask in order to keep their job, and ultimately their family
fed, are compromised. They often feel shame and are subdued. People have stopped talking
with each other while media controls the narrative.
The ‘no v oice’ theme has o en become literal with train
passengers told not to speak to each other in case they pass on the
‘virus’, singing banned for the same reason and bonkers California
oﬃcials telling people riding roller coasters that they cannot shout
and scream. Cathy said she heard ev ery day from healed MKUltra
surviv ors who cannot w ear a mask without ﬂashing back on w aystheir breathing w as controlled – ‘from ball gags and penises to w ater
boarding’. She said that through the y ears when she saw images of
people in China w earing masks ‘due to pollution’ that it w as really
to control their oxygen lev els. ‘I knew it w as as much of a population
control mechanism of depersonalisation as are burkas’, she said.
Masks are another Chinese communist/fascist method of control that
has been sw ept across the W est as the W est becomes China at
lightning speed since w e entered 2020.
Mask-19
There are other reasons for mandatory masks and these include
destroying respiratory health to call it ‘Covid-19’ and stunting brain
dev elopment of children and the y oung. Dr Margarite Griesz-
Brisson MD, PhD, is a Consultant Neurologist and
Neurophysiologist and the Founder and Medical Director of the
London Neurology and P ain Clinic. Her CV goes down the street
and round the corner . She is clearly someone who cares about people
and w on’ t parrot the propaganda. Griesz-Brisson has a PhD in
pharmacology , with special interest in neurotoxicology ,
environmental medicine, neuroregeneration and neuroplasticity (the
w ay the brain can change in the light of information receiv ed). She
w ent public in October , 2020, with a passionate w arning about the
eﬀects of mask-w earing laws:
The reinhalation of our exhaled air will without a doubt create oxygen deficiency and a
flooding of carbon dioxide. We know that the human brain is very sensitive to oxygen
deprivation. There are nerve cells for example in the hippocampus that can’t be longer than 3
minutes without oxygen – they cannot survive. The acute warning symptoms are headaches,
drowsiness, dizziness, issues in concentration, slowing down of reaction time – reactions of
the cognitive system.
Oh, I know , let’ s tell bus, truck and taxi driv ers to w ear them and
people w orking machinery . How about pilots, doctors and police?
Griesz-Brisson makes the important point that while the symptoms
she mentions may fade as the body readjusts this does not alter the
fact that people continue to operate in oxygen deﬁcit with long list ofpotential consequences. She said it w as w ell known that
neurodegenerativ e diseases take y ears or decades to dev elop. ‘If
today y ou forget y our phone number , the breakdown in y our brain
w ould hav e already started 20 or 30 y ears ago.’ She said
degenerativ e processes in y our brain are ge ing ampliﬁed as y our
oxygen depriv ation continues through w earing a mask. Nerv e cells
in the brain are unable to divide themselv es normally in these
circumstances and lost nerv e cells will no longer be regenerated.
‘What is gone is gone.’ Now consider that people like shop w orkers
and schoolchildren  are w earing masks for hours ev ery day . What in
the name of sanity is going to be happening to them? ‘I do not w ear
a mask, I need my brain to think’, Griesz-Brisson said, ‘I w ant to
hav e a clear head when I deal with my patients and not be in a
carbon dioxide-induced anaesthesia’. If y ou are told to w ear a mask
anywhere ask the organisation, police, store, whatev er , for their risk
assessment on the dangers and negativ e eﬀects on mind and body of
enforcing mask-w earing. They w on’ t hav e one because it has nev er
been done not ev en by gov ernment. All of them must be subject to
class-action lawsuits as the consequences come to light. They don’ t
do mask risk assessments for an obvious reason. They know what
the conclusions w ould be and independent scientiﬁc studies that
have  been done tell a horror story of consequences.
‘Masks are criminal’
Dr Griesz-Brisson said that for children and adolescents, masks are
an absolute no-no. They had an extremely activ e and adaptiv e
immune system and their brain w as incredibly activ e with so much
to learn. ‘The child’ s brain, or the y outh’ s brain, is thirsting for
oxygen.’ The more metabolically activ e an organ w as, the more
oxygen it required; and in children and adolescents ev ery organ w as
metabolically activ e. Griesz-Brisson said that to depriv e a child’ s or
adolescent’ s brain of oxygen, or to restrict it in any w ay , w as not only
dangerous to their health, it w as absolutely criminal. ‘Oxygen
deﬁciency inhibits the dev elopment of the brain, and the damage
that has taken place as a result CANNOT be rev ersed.’ Mindmanipulators of MKUltra put masks on tw o-y ear -olds they w anted
to neurologically rewire and y ou can see why . Griesz-Brisson said a
child needs the brain to learn and the brain needs oxygen to
function. ‘W e don’ t need a clinical study for that. This is simple,
indisputable physiology .’ Consciously and purposely induced
oxygen deﬁciency w as an absolutely deliberate health hazard, and
an absolute medical contraindication which means that ‘this drug,
this therapy , this method or measure should not be used, and is not
allow ed to be used’. T o coerce an entire population to use an
absolute medical contraindication by force, she said, there had to be
deﬁnite and serious reasons and the reasons must be presented to
competent interdisciplinary and independent bodies to be v eriﬁed
and authorised. She had this w arning of the consequences that w ere
coming if mask w earing continued:
When, in ten years, dementia is going to increase exponentially, and the younger generations
couldn’t reach their god-given potential, it won’t help to say ‘we didn’t need the masks’. I
know how damaging oxygen deprivation is for the brain, cardiologists know how damaging it
is for the heart, pulmonologists know how damaging it is for the lungs. Oxygen deprivation
damages every single organ. Where are our health departments, our health insurance, our
medical associations? It would have been their duty to be vehemently against the lockdown
and to stop it and stop it from the very beginning.
Why do the medical boards issue punishments to doctors who give people exemptions? Does
the person or the doctor seriously have to prove that oxygen deprivation harms people? What
kind of medicine are our doctors and medical associations representing? Who is responsible
for this crime? The ones who want to enforce it? The ones who let it happen and play along,
or the ones who don’t prevent it?
All of the organisations and people she mentions there either
answ er directly to the Cult or do whatev er hierarchical lev els abov e
them tell them to do. The outcome of both is the same. ‘It’ s not about
masks, it’ s not about viruses, it’ s certainly not about y our health’,
Griesz-Brisson said. ‘It is about much, much more. I am not
participating. I am not afraid.’ They w ere taking our air to breathe
and there w as no unfounded medical exemption from face masks.
Oxygen depriv ation w as dangerous for ev ery single brain. It had to
be the free decision of ev ery human being whether they w ant tow ear a mask that w as absolutely ineﬀectiv e to protect themselv es
from a virus. She ended by rightly identifying where the
responsibility lies for all this:
The imperative of the hour is personal responsibility. We are responsible for what we think,
not the media. We are responsible for what we do, not our superiors. We are responsible for
our health, not the World Health Organization. And we are responsible for what happens in
our country, not the government.
Halle-bloody-lujah.
But surgeons wear masks, right?
Independent studies of mask-w earing hav e produced a long list of
reports detailing mental, emotional and physical dangers. What a
deﬁnition of insanity to see police oﬃcers imposing mask-w earing
on the public which will cumulativ ely damage their health while the
police themselv es w ear masks that will cumulativ ely damage their
health. It’ s u er madness and both public and police do this because
‘the gov ernment says so’ – y es a gov ernment of brain-donor idiots
like UK Health Secretary Ma  Hancock reading the ‘follow the
science’ scripts of psychopathic, lunatic psychologists. The response
y ou get from Stockholm syndrome suﬀerers defending the v ery
authorities that are destroying them and their families is that
‘surgeons w ear masks’. This is considered the game, set and match
that they must w ork and don’ t cause oxygen deﬁcit. W ell, actually ,
scientiﬁc studies hav e shown that they do  and oxygen lev els are
monitored in operating theatres to compensate. Surgeons w ear
masks to stop spi le and such like dropping into open w ounds – not
to stop ‘viral particles’ which are so miniscule they can only be seen
through an electron microscope. Holes in the masks are signiﬁcantly
bigger than ‘viral particles’ and if y ou sneeze or cough they will
breach the mask. I w atched an incredibly disingenuous ‘experiment’
that claimed to prov e that masks w ork in catching ‘virus’ material
from the mouth and nose. They did this with a slow motion camera
and the mask did block big stuﬀ which stay ed inside the mask and•
•
•against the face to be breathed in or cause infections on the face as
w e hav e seen with many children. ‘V iral particles’, how ev er , w ould
nev er hav e been picked up by the camera as they came through the
mask when they are far too small to be seen. The ‘experiment’ w as
therefore disingenuous and  useless.
Studies hav e concluded that w earing masks in operating theatres
(and thus elsewhere) make no diﬀerence to prev enting infection
while the opposite is true with toxic shite building up in the mask
and this had led to an explosion in tooth decay and gum disease
dubbed by dentists ‘mask mouth’. Y ou might hav e seen the Internet
video of a furious American doctor urging people to take oﬀ their
masks a er a four -y ear -old patient had been rushed to hospital the
night before and nearly died with a lung infection that doctors
sourced to mask w earing. A study in the journal Cancer Discovery
found that inhalation of harmful microbes can contribute to
adv anced stage lung cancer in adults and long-term use of masks
can help breed dangerous pathogens. Microbiologists hav e said
frequent mask w earing creates a moist environment in which
microbes can grow and proliferate before entering the lungs. The
Canadian Agency for Drugs and T echnologies in Health, or CADTH,
a Canadian national organisation that provides research and
analysis to healthcare decision-makers, said this as long ago as 2013
in a report entitled ‘Use of Surgical Masks in the Operating Room: A
Review of the Clinical Eﬀectiv eness and Guidelines’. It said:
 
No evidence w as found to support the use of surgical face masks
to reduce the frequency of surgical site infections
No evidence w as found on the eﬀectiv eness of w earing surgical
face masks to protect staﬀ from infectious material in the
operating room.
Guidelines recommend the use of surgical face masks by staﬀ in
the operating room to protect both operating room staﬀ and
patients (despite the lack of evidence).
 W e w ere told that the w orld could go back to ‘normal’ with the
arriv al of the ‘v accines’. When they came, fraudulent as they are, the
story changed as I knew that it w ould. W e are in the midst of
transforming ‘normal’, not going back to it. Mary Ramsay , head of
immunisation at Public Health England, echoed the w ords of US
criminal Anthony Fauci who said masks and other regulations must
stay no ma er if people are v accinated. The Fauci idiot continued to
w ear tw o masks – diﬀerent colours so both could be clearly seen –
a er he claimed  to hav e been v accinated. Senator Rand P aul told
Fauci in one exchange that his double-masks w ere ‘theatre’ and he
w as right. It’ s all theatre. Mary Ramsay back-tracked on the v accine-
return-to-normal theme when she said the public may need to w ear
masks and social-distance for y ears despite the jabs. ‘P eople hav e got
used to those low er -lev el restrictions now , and [they] can liv e with
them’, she said telling us what the idea has been all along. ‘The
v accine does not giv e y ou a pass, ev en if y ou hav e had it, y ou must
continue to follow all the guidelines’ said a Public Health England
statement which reneged on what w e had been told before and
made having the ‘v accine’ irrelev ant to ‘normality’ ev en by the
oﬃcial story . Spain’ s fascist gov ernment trumped ev ery one by
passing a law mandating the w earing of masks on the beach and
ev en when swimming in the sea. The mov e w ould hav e dev astated
what’ s le  of the Spanish tourist industry , posed potential breathing
dangers to swimmers and had Northern European sunbathers
w alking around with their forehead brown and the rest of their face
white as a sheet. The ruling w as so crazy that it had to be retracted
a er pressure from public and tourist industry , but it conﬁrmed
where the Cult w ants to go with masks and how clinically insane
authority has become. The determination to make masks permanent
and hide the serious dangers to body and mind can be seen in the
censorship of scientist Professor Denis Rancourt by Bill Gates-
funded academic publishing w ebsite ResearchGate ov er his papers
exposing the dangers and uselessness of masks. Rancourt said:
ResearchGate today has permanently locked my account, which I have had since 2015. Their
reasons graphically show the nature of their attack against democracy, and their corruption ofscience … By their obscene non-logic, a scientific review of science articles reporting on
harms caused by face masks has a ‘potential to cause harm’. No criticism of the psychological
device (face masks) is tolerated, if the said criticism shows potential to influence public policy.
This is what happens in a fascist w orld.
Where are the ‘greens’ (again)?
Other dangers of w earing masks especially regularly relate to the
inhalation of minute plastic ﬁbres into the lungs and the deluge of
discarded masks in the environment and oceans. Estimates
predicted that more than 1.5 billion disposable masks will end up in
the w orld’ s oceans ev ery y ear polluting the w ater with tons of plastic
and endangering marine wildlife. Studies project that humans are
using 129 billion face masks each month w orldwide – about three
million a minute. Most are disposable and made from plastic, non-
biodegradable microﬁbers that break down into smaller plastic
particles that become widespread in ecosystems. They are li ering
cities, clogging sew age channels and turning up in bodies of w ater . I
hav e wri en in other books about the immense amounts of
microplastics from endless sources now being absorbed into the
body . Rolf Halden, director of the Arizona State Univ ersity (ASU)
Biodesign Center for Environmental Health Engineering, w as the
senior researcher in a 2020 study that analysed 47 human tissue
samples and found microplastics in all of them. ‘W e hav e detected
these chemicals of plastics in ev ery single organ that w e hav e
inv estigated’, he said. I wrote in The Answer  about the w orld being
deluged with microplastics. A study by the W orldwide Fund for
Nature (WWF) found that people are consuming on av erage ev ery
w eek some 2,000 tiny pieces of plastic mostly through w ater and also
through marine life and the air . Ev ery y ear humans are ingesting
enough microplastics to ﬁll a heaped dinner plate and in a life-time
of 79 y ears it is enough to ﬁll tw o large w aste bins. Marco
Lambertini, WWF International director general said: ‘Not only are
plastics polluting our oceans and w aterw ays and killing marine life –
it’ s in all of us and w e can’ t escape consuming plastics,’ Americangeologists found tiny plastic ﬁbres, beads and shards in rainw ater
samples collected from the remote slopes of the Rocky Mountain
National P ark near Denv er , Colorado. Their report w as headed: ‘It is
raining plastic.’ Rachel Adams, senior lecturer in Biomedical Science
at Cardiﬀ Metropolitan Univ ersity , said that among health
consequences are internal inﬂammation and immune responses to a
‘foreign body’. She further pointed out that microplastics become
carriers of toxins including mercury , pesticides and dioxins (a
known cause of cancer and reproductiv e and dev elopmental
problems). These toxins accumulate in the fa y tissues once they
enter the body through microplastics. Now this is being
compounded massiv ely by people pu ing plastic on their face and
throwing it aw ay .
W orkers exposed to polypropylene plastic ﬁbres known as ‘ﬂock’
hav e dev eloped ‘ﬂock w orker ’ s lung’ from inhaling small pieces of
the ﬂock ﬁbres which can damage lung tissue, reduce breathing
capacity and exacerbate other respiratory problems. Now  …
commonly used surgical masks hav e three lay ers of melt-blown
textiles made of … polypropylene. W e hav e billions of people
pu ing these microplastics against their mouth, nose and face for
hours at a time day a er day in the form of masks. How does
any one think that will w ork out? I mean – what could possibly go
wrong? W e posted a number of scientiﬁc studies on this at
davidicke.com , but when I w ent back to them as I w as writing this
book the links to the science research w ebsite where they w ere
hosted w ere dead. Anything that challenges the oﬃcial narrativ e in
any w ay is either censored or viliﬁed. The oﬃcial narrativ e is so
unsupportable by the evidence that only deleting the truth can
protect it. A study by Chinese scientists still surviv ed – with the
usual twist which it why it w as still activ e, I guess. Y es, they found
that virtually all the masks they tested increased the daily intake of
microplastic ﬁbres, but people should still w ear them because the
danger from the ‘virus’ w as w orse said the crazy ‘team’ from the
Institute of Hydrobiology in W uhan. Scientists ﬁrst discov ered
microplastics in lung tissue of some patients who died of lung cancerin the 1990s. Subsequent studies hav e conﬁrmed the potential health
damage with the plastic degrading slowly and remaining in the
lungs to accumulate in v olume. W uhan researchers used a machine
simulating human breathing to establish that masks shed up to
nearly 4,000 microplastic ﬁbres in a month with reused masks
producing more. Scientists said some masks are laced with toxic
chemicals and a v ariety of compounds seriously restricted for both
health and environmental reasons. They include cobalt (used in blue
dy e) and formaldehyde known to cause w atery ey es, burning
sensations in the ey es, nose, and throat, plus coughing, wheezing
and nausea. No – that must be ‘Covid-19’.
Mask ‘worms’
There is another and potentially ev en more sinister content of masks.
Mostly new masks of diﬀerent makes ﬁlmed under a microscope
around the w orld hav e been found to contain strange black ﬁbres or
‘w orms’ that appear to mov e or ‘crawl’ by themselv es and react to
heat and w ater . The nearest I hav e seen to them are the self-
replicating ﬁbres that are pulled out through the skin of those
suﬀering from Morgellons disease which has been connected to the
phenomena of ‘chemtrails’ which I will bring into the story later on.
Morgellons ﬁbres continue to grow outside the body and hav e a
form of artiﬁcial intelligence. Black ‘w orm’ ﬁbres in masks hav e that
kind of feel to them and there is a nanotechnology technique called
‘w orm micelles’ which carry and release drugs or anything else y ou
w ant to deliv er to the body . For sure the suppression of humanity by
mind altering drugs is the Cult agenda big time and the more
excuses they can ﬁnd to gain access to the body the more
opportunities there are to make that happen whether through
‘v accines’ or masks pushed against the mouth and nose for hours on
end.
So let us summarise the pros and cons of masks:Against masks : Breathing in y our own carbon dioxide; depriving the
body and brain of suﬃcient oxygen; build-up of toxins in the mask
that can be breathed into the lungs and cause rashes on the face and
‘mask-mouth’; breathing microplastic ﬁbres and toxic chemicals into
the lungs; dehumanisation and deleting individualisation by literally
making people faceless; destroying human emotional interaction
through facial expression and deleting parental connection with
their babies which look for guidance to their facial expression.
For masks:  They don’ t protect y ou from a ‘virus’ that doesn’ t exist
and ev en if it did ‘viral’ particles are so minute they are smaller than
the holes in the mask.
Gov ernments, police, supermarkets, businesses, transport
companies, and all the rest who seek to impose masks hav e done no
risk assessment on their consequences for health and psychology
and are now open to group lawsuits when the impact becomes clear
with a cumulativ e epidemic of respiratory and other disease.
Authorities will try to exploit these eﬀects and hide the real cause by
dubbing them ‘Covid-19’. Can y ou imagine se ing out to force the
population to w ear health-destroying masks without doing any
assessment of the risks? It is criminal and it is evil, but then how
many people targeted in this w ay , who see their children told to
w ear them all day at school, hav e asked for a risk assessment?
Billions can’ t be imposed upon by the few unless the billions allow it.
Oh, y es, with just a tinge of irony , 85 percent of all masks made
w orldwide come from China .
Wash your hands in toxic shite
‘Covid’ rules include the use of toxic sanitisers and again the health
consequences of constantly applying toxins to be absorbed through
the skin is obvious to any lev el of Renegade Mind. America’ s Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) said that sanitisers are drugs and
issued a w arning about 75 dangerous brands which containmethanol used in antifreeze and can cause death, kidney damage
and blindness. The FDA circulated the following w arning ev en for
those brands that it claims to be safe:
Store hand sanitizer out of the reach of pets and children, and children should use it only with
adult supervision. Do not drink hand sanitizer. This is particularly important for young
children, especially toddlers, who may be attracted by the pleasant smell or brightly colored
bottles of hand sanitizer.
Drinking even a small amount of hand sanitizer can cause alcohol poisoning in children.
(However, there is no need to be concerned if your children eat with or lick their hands after
using hand sanitizer.) During this coronavirus pandemic, poison control centers have had an
increase in calls about accidental ingestion of hand sanitizer, so it is important that adults
monitor young children’s use.
Do not allow pets to swallow hand sanitizer. If you think your pet has eaten something
potentially dangerous, call your veterinarian or a pet poison control center right away. Hand
sanitizer is flammable and should be stored away from heat and flames. When using hand
sanitizer, rub your hands until they feel completely dry before performing activities that may
involve heat, sparks, static electricity, or open flames.
There y ou go, perfectly safe, then, and that’ s without ev en a mention
of the toxins absorbed through the skin. Come on kids – sanitise
y our hands ev erywhere y ou go. It will sav e y ou from the ‘virus’. Put
all these elements together of the ‘Covid’ normal and see how much
health and psychology is being cumulativ ely damaged, ev en
dev astated, to ‘protect y our health’. Makes sense, right? They are
only imposing these things because they care, right? Right?
Submitting to insanity
Psychological reframing of the population goes v ery deep and is
done in many less obvious w ays. I hear people say how
contradictory and crazy ‘Covid’ rules are and how they are ev er
changing. This is explained aw ay by dismissing those inv olv ed as
idiots. It is a big mistake. The Cult is delighted if its cold calculation
is perceiv ed as incompetence and idiocy when it is anything but. Oh,
y es, there are idiots within the system – lots of them – but they are
administering  the Cult agenda, mostly unknowingly . They are not
deciding and dictating it. The bulw ark against tyranny is self-respect, alw ays has been, alw ays will be. It is self-respect that has
broken ev ery tyranny in history . By its v ery nature self-respect will
not bow to oppression and its perpetrators. There is so li le self-
respect that it’ s alw ays the few that ov erturn dictators. Many may
ev entually follow , but the few with the iron spines (self-respect) kick
it oﬀ and generate the momentum. The Cult targets self-respect in
the knowledge that once this has gone only submission remains.
Crazy , contradictory , ev er -changing ‘Covid’ rules are systematically
applied by psychologists to delete self-respect. They want  y ou to see
that the rules make no sense. It is one thing to decide to do
something when you  hav e made the choice based on evidence and
logic. Y ou still retain y our self-respect. It is quite another when y ou
can see what y ou are being told to do is insane, ridiculous and
makes no sense, and yet you still do it . Y our self-respect is
extinguished and this has been happening as ev er more obviously
stupid and nonsensical things hav e been demanded and the great
majority hav e complied ev en when they can see they are stupid and
nonsensical.
P eople w alk around in face-nappies knowing they are damaging
their health and make no diﬀerence to a ‘virus’. They do it in fear of
not doing it. I know it’ s da , but I’ll do it anyw ay . When that
happens something dies inside of y ou and submissiv e reframing has
begun. Next there’ s a need to hide from y ourself that y ou hav e
conceded y our self-respect and y ou convince y ourself that y ou hav e
not really submi ed to fear and intimidation. Y ou begin to believ e
that y ou are complying with craziness because it’ s the right thing to
do. When ﬁrst y ou concede y our self-respect of 2+2 = 4 to 2+2 = 5 y ou
know  y ou are compromising y our self-respect. Gradually to av oid
facing that fact y ou begin to believe  that 2+2=5. Y ou hav e been
reframed and I hav e been w atching this process happening in the
human psyche on an industrial scale. The Cult is w orking to break
y our spirit and one of its major tools in that w ar is humiliation. I
read how former American soldier Bradley Manning (later Chelsea
Manning a er a sex-change) w as treated a er being jailed for
supplying W ikiLeaks with documents exposing the enormity ofgov ernment and elite mendacity . Manning w as isolated in solitary
conﬁnement for eight months, put under 24-hour surv eillance,
forced to hand ov er clothing before going to bed, and stand naked
for ev ery roll call. This is systematic humiliation. The introduction of
anal sw ab ‘Covid’ tests in China has been done for the same reason
to delete self-respect and induce compliant submission. Anal sw abs
are mandatory for incoming passengers in parts of China and
American diplomats hav e said they w ere forced to undergo the
indignity which w ould hav e been calculated humiliation by the
Cult-owned Chinese gov ernment that has America in its sights.
Government-people: An abusive relationship
Spirit-breaking psychological techniques include giving people hope
and apparent respite from tyranny only to take it aw ay again. This
happened in the UK during Christmas, 2020, when the psycho-
psychologists and their political lackeys announced an easing of
restrictions ov er the holiday only to reimpose them almost
immediately on the basis of y et another lie. There is a big
psychological diﬀerence betw een ge ing used to oppression and
being giv en hope of relief only to hav e that dashed. Psychologists
know this and w e hav e seen the technique used repeatedly . Then
there is traumatising people before y ou introduce more extreme
regulations that require compliance. A perfect case w as the
announcement by the dark and sinister Whi y and V allance in the
UK that ‘new data’ predicted that 4,000 could die ev ery day ov er the
winter of 2020/2021 if w e did not lockdown again. I think they call it
lying and a er traumatising people with that claim out came
Jackboot Johnson the next day with new curbs on human freedom.
Psychologists know that a frightened and traumatised mind
becomes suggestable to submission and behaviour reframing.
Underpinning all this has been to make people fearful and
suspicious of each other and see themselv es as a potential danger to
others. In league with deleted self-respect y ou hav e the perfect
psychological recipe for self-loathing. The relationship betw een
authority and public is now demonstrably the same as that ofsubservience to an abusiv e partner . These are signs of an abusiv e
relationship explained by psychologist Leslie Becker -Phelps:
Psychological and emotional abuse:  Undermining a partner ’ s
self-w orth with v erbal a acks, name-calling, and beli ling.
Humiliating the partner in public, unjustly accusing them of having
an aﬀair , or interrogating them about their ev ery behavior . Keeping
partner confused or oﬀ balance by saying they w ere just kidding or
blaming the partner for ‘making’ them act this w ay … Feigning in
public that they care while turning against them in priv ate. This
leads to victims frequently feeling confused, incompetent, unw orthy ,
hopeless, and chronically self-doubting. [Apply these techniques to
how gov ernments hav e treated the population since New Y ear , 2020,
and the parallels are obvious.]
Physical abuse:  The abuser might physically harm their partner in
a range of w ays, such as grabbing, hi ing, punching, or shoving
them. They might throw objects at them or harm them with a
w eapon. [Observ e the physical harm imposed by masks, lockdown,
and so on.]
Threats and intimidation:  One w ay abusers keep their partners in
line is by instilling fear . They might be v erbally threatening, or giv e
threatening looks or gestures. Abusers o en make it known that
they are tracking their partner ’ s ev ery mov e. They might destroy
their partner ’ s possessions, threaten to harm them, or threaten to
harm their family members. Not surprisingly , victims of this abuse
o en feel anxiety , fear , and panic. [No w ords necessary .]
Isolation:  Abusers o en limit their partner ’ s activities, forbidding
them to talk or interact with friends or family . They might limit
access to a car or ev en turn oﬀ their phone. All of this might be done
by physically holding them against their will, but is o en
accomplished through psychological abuse and intimidation. The
more isolated a person feels, the few er resources they hav e to help
gain perspectiv e on their situation and to escape from it. [No w ords
necessary .]Economic abuse:  Abusers o en make their partners beholden to
them for money by controlling access to funds of any kind. They
might prev ent their partner from ge ing a job or withhold access to
money they earn from a job. This creates ﬁnancial dependency that
makes leaving the relationship v ery diﬃcult. [See destruction of
liv elihoods and the proposed meagre ‘guaranteed income’ so long as
y ou do whatev er y ou are told.]
Using children:  An abuser might disparage their partner ’ s
parenting skills, tell their children lies about their partner , threaten
to take custody of their children, or threaten to harm their children.
These tactics instil fear and o en elicit compliance. [See reframed
social service maﬁa and how children are being mercilessly abused
by the state ov er ‘Covid’ while their parents look on too frightened
to do anything.]
A further recurring trait in an abusiv e relationship is the abused
blaming themselv es for their abuse and making excuses for the
abuser . W e hav e the public blaming each other for lockdown abuse
by gov ernment and many making excuses for the gov ernment while
a acking those who challenge the gov ernment. How o en w e hav e
heard authorities say that rules are being imposed or reimposed only
because people hav e refused to ‘behav e’ and follow the rules. W e
don’ t w ant to do it – it’ s you .
Renegade Minds are an antidote to all of these things. They will
nev er concede their self-respect no ma er what the circumstances.
Ev en when apparent humiliation is heaped upon them they laugh in
its face and reﬂect back the humiliation on the abuser where it
belongs. Renegade Minds will nev er w ear masks they know are only
imposed to humiliate, suppress and damage both physically and
psychologically . Consequences will take care of themselv es and they
will nev er break their spirit or cause them to concede to tyranny . UK
newspaper columnist P eter Hitchens w as one of the few in the
mainstream media to speak out against lockdowns and forced
v accinations. He then announced he had taken the jab. He w anted to
see family members abroad and he believ ed v accine passports w ere
inevitable ev en though they had not y et been introduced. Hitchenshas a questioning and critical mind, but not a Renegade one. If he
had no amount of pressure w ould hav e made him concede. Hitchens
excused his action by saying that the ba le has been lost. Renegade
Minds nev er accept defeat when freedom is at stake and ev en if they
are the last one standing the self-respect of not submi ing to tyranny
is more important than any outcome or any consequence.
That’ s why Renegade Minds are the only minds that ev er changed
anything w orth changing.‘ RCHAPTER EIGHT
‘Reframing’ insanity
Insanity is relative. It depends on who has who locked in what cage
Ray Bradbury
eframing’ a mind means simply to change its perception and
behaviour . This can be done subconsciously to such an extent
that subjects hav e no idea they hav e been ‘reframed’ while to any
observ er changes in behaviour and a itudes are obvious.
Human society is being reframed on a ginormous scale since the
start of 2020 and here w e hav e the reason why psychologists rather
than doctors hav e been calling the shots. Ask most people who hav e
succumbed to ‘Covid’ reframing if they hav e changed and most will
say ‘no’; but they have  and fundamentally . The Cult’ s long-game has
been preparing for these times since w ay back and crucial to that has
been to prepare both population and oﬃcialdom mentally and
emotionally . T o use the mind-control parlance they had to reframe
the population with a mentality that w ould submit to fascism and
reframe those in gov ernment and law enforcement to impose
fascism or at least go along with it. The result has been the fact-
deleted mindlessness of ‘W okeness’ and oﬃcialdom that has either
enthusiastically or unquestioningly imposed global tyranny
demanded by reframed politicians on behalf of psychopathic and
deeply evil cultists. ‘Cognitiv e reframing’ identiﬁes and challenges
the w ay someone sees the w orld in the form of situations,
experiences and emotions and then restructures those perceptions to
view the same set of circumstances in a diﬀerent w ay . This can hav ebeneﬁts if the a itudes are personally destructiv e while on the other
side it has the potential for individual and collectiv e mind control
which the subject has no idea has ev en happened.
Cognitiv e therapy w as dev eloped in the 1960s by Aaron T . Beck
who w as born in Rhode Island in 1921 as the son of Jewish
immigrants from the Ukraine. He became interested in the
techniques as a treatment for depression. Beck’ s daughter Judith S.
Beck is prominent in the same ﬁeld and they founded the Beck
Institute for Cognitiv e Behavior Therapy in Philadelphia in 1994.
Cognitiv e reframing, how ev er , began to be used w orldwide by those
with a v ery dark agenda. The Cult reframes politicians to change
their a itudes and actions until they are completely at odds with
what they once appeared to stand for . The same has been happening
to gov ernment administrators at all lev els, law enforcement, military
and the human population. Cultists lov e mind control for tw o main
reasons: It allows them to control what people think, do and say to
secure agenda adv ancement and, by deﬁnition, it calms their
legendary insecurity and fear of the unexpected. I hav e studied mind
control since the time I trav elled America in 1996. I may hav e been
talking to next to no one in terms of an audience in those y ears, but
my goodness did I gather a phenomenal amount of information and
knowledge about so many things including the techniques of mind
control. I hav e described this in detail in other books going back to
The Biggest Secret  in 1998. I met a v ery large number of people
recov ering from MKUltra and its oﬀshoots and successors and I
began to see how these same techniques w ere being used on the
population in general. This w as nev er more obvious than since the
‘Covid’ hoax began.
Reframing the enforcers
I hav e observ ed ov er the last tw o decades and more the v ery clear
transformation in the dynamic betw een the police, oﬃcialdom and
the public. I tracked this in the books as the relationship mutated
from one of serving the public to seeing them as almost the enemy
and certainly a low er caste. There has alw ays been a class dividebased on income and alw ays been some psychopathic, corrupt, and
big-I-am police oﬃcers. This w as diﬀerent. Wholesale change w as
unfolding in the collectiv e dynamic; it w as less about money and far
more about position and perceiv ed pow er . An us-and-them w as
emerging. Noses w ere li ed skyw ard by gov ernment administration
and law enforcement and their a itude to the public they w ere
supposed  to be serving changed to one of increasing contempt,
superiority and control. The transformation w as so clear and
widespread that it had to be planned. Collectiv e a itudes and
dynamics do not change naturally and organically that quickly on
that scale. I then came across an organisation in Britain called
Common Purpose created in the late 1980s by Julia Middleton who
w ould w ork in the oﬃce of Deputy Prime Minister John Presco 
during the long and disastrous premiership of w ar criminal T ony
Blair . When Blair speaks the Cult is speaking and the man should
hav e been in jail a long time ago. Common Purpose proclaims itself
to be one of the biggest ‘leadership dev elopment’ organisations in
the w orld while functioning as a charity  with all the ﬁnancial beneﬁts
which come from that. It hosts ‘leadership dev elopment’ courses and
programmes all ov er the w orld and claims to hav e ‘brought
together ’ what it calls ‘leaders’ from more than 100 countries on six
continents. The modus operandi of Common Purpose can be
compared with the w ork of the UK gov ernment’ s reframing netw ork
that includes the Behavioural Insights T eam ‘nudge unit’ and
‘Covid’ reframing specialists at SPI-B. W ikiLeaks described
Common Purpose long ago as ‘a hidden virus in our gov ernment
and schools’ which is unknown to the general public: ‘It recruits and
trains “leaders” to be loy al to the directiv es of Common Purpose and
the EU, instead of to their own departments, which they then
undermine or subv ert, the NHS [National Health Service] being an
example.’ This is a vital point to understand the ‘Covid’ hoax. The
NHS, and its equiv alent around the w orld, has been u erly reframed
in terms of administrators and much of the medical personnel with
the transformation underpinned by recruitment policies. The
outcome has been the criminal and psychopathic behaviour of theNHS ov er ‘Covid’ and w e hav e seen the same in ev ery other major
country . W ikiLeaks said Common Purpose trainees are ‘learning to
rule without regard to democracy’ and to usher in a police state
(current ev ents explained). Common Purpose operated like a ‘glue’
and had members in the NHS, BBC, police, legal profession, church,
many of Britain’ s 7,000 quangos, local councils, the Civil Service,
gov ernment ministries and P arliament, and controlled many RDA ’ s
(Regional Dev elopment Agencies). Here w e hav e one answ er for
how and why British institutions and their like in other countries
hav e changed so negativ ely in relation to the public. This further
explains how and why the bey ond-disgraceful reframed BBC has
become a propaganda arm of ‘Covid’ fascism. They are all part of a
netw ork pursuing the same goal.
By 2019 Common Purpose w as quoting a ﬁgure of 85,000 ‘leaders’
that had a ended its programmes. These ‘students’ of all ages are
known as Common Purpose ‘graduates’ and they consist of
gov ernment, state and local gov ernment oﬃcials and administrators,
police chiefs and oﬃcers, and a whole range of others operating
within the national, local and global establishment. Cressida Dick,
Commissioner of the London Metropolitan P olice, is the Common
Purpose graduate who w as the ‘Gold Commander ’ that ov ersaw
what can only be described as the murder of Brazilian electrician
Jean Charles de Menezes in 2005. He w as held down by
psychopathic police and shot sev en times in the head by a
psychopathic lunatic a er being mistaken for a terrorist when he
w as just a bloke going about his day . Dick authorised oﬃcers to
pursue and keep surv eillance on de Menezes and ordered that he be
stopped from entering the underground train system. P olice
psychopaths took her at her w ord clearly . She w as ‘disciplined’ for
this outrage by being promoted  – ev entually to the top of the ‘Met’
police where she has been a disaster . Many Chief Constables
controlling the police in diﬀerent parts of the UK are and hav e been
Common Purpose graduates. I hav e heard the ‘graduate’ netw ork
described as a sort of Maﬁa or secret society operating within the
fabric of gov ernment at all lev els pursuing a collectiv e policyingrained at Common Purpose training ev ents. Founder Julia
Middleton herself has said:
L o c a l l y  a n d  i n t e r n a t i o n a l l y ,  C o m m o n  P u r p o s e  g r a d u a t e s  w i l l  b e  ‘ l i g h t i n g  s m a l l  f i r e s ’  t o  c r e a t e
c h a n g e  i n  t h e i r  o r g a n i s a t i o n s  a n d  c o m m u n i t i e s  …  T h e  C o m m o n  P u r p o s e  e f f e c t  i s  b e s t
i l l u s t r a t e d  b y  t h e  m a n y  s t o r i e s  o f  s m a l l  c h a n g e s  b r o u g h t  a b o u t  b y  l e a d e r s ,  w h o  t h e m s e l v e s
h a v e  c h a n g e d .
A Common Purpose mission statement declared:
C o m m o n  P u r p o s e  a i m s  t o  i m p r o v e  t h e  w a y  s o c i e t y  w o r k s  b y  e x p a n d i n g  t h e  v i s i o n ,  d e c i s i o n -
m a k i n g  a b i l i t y  a n d  i n f l u e n c e  o f  a l l  k i n d s  o f  l e a d e r s .  T h e  o r g a n i s a t i o n  r u n s  a  v a r i e t y  o f
e d u c a t i o n a l  p r o g r a m m e s  f o r  l e a d e r s  o f  a l l  a g e s ,  b a c k g r o u n d s  a n d  s e c t o r s ,  i n  o r d e r  t o  p r o v i d e
t h e m  w i t h  t h e  i n s p i r a t i o n a l ,  i n f o r m a t i o n  a n d  o p p o r t u n i t i e s  t h e y  n e e d  t o  c h a n g e  t h e  w o r l d .
Y es, but into what? Since 2020 the answ er has become clear .
NLP and the Delphi technique
Common Purpose w ould seem to be a perfect name or w ould
common programming be be er? One of the foundation methods of
reaching ‘consensus’ (group think) is by se ing the agenda theme
and then encouraging, cajoling or pressuring ev ery one to agree a
‘consensus’ in line with the core theme promoted by Common
Purpose. The methodology inv olv es the ‘Delphi technique’, or an
adaption of it, in which opinions are expressed that are summarised
by a ‘facilitator or change agent’ at each stage. P articipants are
‘encouraged’ to modify their views in the light of what others hav e
said. Stage by stage the former individual opinions are merged into
group consensus which just happens to be what Common Purpose
w ants them to believ e. A key part of this is to marginalise any one
refusing to concede to group think and turn the group against them
to apply pressure to conform. W e are seeing this v ery technique used
on the general population to make ‘Covid’ group-thinkers hostile to
those who hav e seen through the bullshit. P eople can be reframed by
using perception manipulation methods such as Neuro-Linguistic
Programming (NLP) in which y ou change perception with the use ofcarefully constructed language. An NLP w ebsite described the
technique this w ay:
…  A  m e t h o d  o f  i n f l u e n c i n g  b r a i n  b e h a v i o u r  ( t h e  ‘ n e u r o ’  p a r t  o f  t h e  p h r a s e )  t h r o u g h  t h e  u s e  o f
l a n g u a g e  ( t h e  ‘ l i n g u i s t i c ’  p a r t )  a n d  o t h e r  t y p e s  o f  c o m m u n i c a t i o n  t o  e n a b l e  a  p e r s o n  t o
‘ r e c o d e ’  t h e  w a y  t h e  b r a i n  r e s p o n d s  t o  s t i m u l i  ( t h a t ’ s  t h e  ‘ p r o g r a m m i n g ’ )  a n d  m a n i f e s t  n e w
a n d  b e t t e r  b e h a v i o u r s .  N e u r o - L i n g u i s t i c  P r o g r a m m i n g  o f t e n  i n c o r p o r a t e s  h y p n o s i s  a n d  s e l f -
h y p n o s i s  t o  h e l p  a c h i e v e  t h e  c h a n g e  ( o r  ‘ p r o g r a m m i n g ’ )  t h a t  i s  w a n t e d .
British alternativ e media operation UKColumn has done v ery
detailed research into Common Purpose ov er a long period. I quoted
co-founder and former nav al oﬃcer Brian Gerrish in my book
Remember Who You Are , published in 2011, as saying the following
y ears before current times:
I t  i s  i n t e r e s t i n g  t h a t  m a n y  o f  t h e  m o t h e r s  w h o  h a v e  h a d  c h i l d r e n  t a k e n  b y  t h e  S t a t e  s p e a k  o f
t h e  S o c i a l  S e r v i c e s  p e o p l e  b e i n g  i c i l y  c o o l ,  e m o t i o n l e s s  a n d ,  a s  t w o  l a d i e s  s a i d  i n  s l i g h t l y
d i f f e r e n t  w o r d s ,  ‘ …  l i k e  l i t t l e  r o b o t s ’ .  W e  k n o w  t h a t  N L P  i s  c u m u l a t i v e ,  s o  p e o p l e  c a n  b e
g i v e n  s m a l l  i m p e r c e p t i b l e  d o s e s  o f  N L P  i n  a  c o u r s e  h e r e ,  a n o t h e r  i n  a  f e w  m o n t h s ,  n e x t  y e a r
e t c .  I n  t h i s  w a y ,  m a j o r  c h a n g e s  a r e  a c c r u e d  i n  t h e i r  p e r s o n a l i t y ,  b u t  t h e  d a y  b y  d a y  c h a n g e  i s
a l m o s t  u n n o t i c e a b l e .
In these and other w ays ‘graduates’ hav e had their perceptions
uniformly reframed and they return to their roles in the institutions
of gov ernment, law enforcement, legal profession, military ,
‘education’, the UK National Health Service and the whole sw athe of
the establishment structure to pursue a common agenda preparing
for the ‘post-industrial’, ‘post-democratic’ society . I say ‘preparing’
but w e are now there. ‘P ost-industrial’ is code for the Great Reset
and ‘post-democratic’ is ‘Covid’ fascism. UKColumn has spoken to
partners of those who hav e a ended Common Purpose ‘training’.
They hav e described how personalities and a itudes of ‘graduates’
changed v ery noticeably for the w orse by the time they had
completed the course. They had been ‘reframed’ and told they are
the ‘leaders’ – the special ones – who know be er than the
population. There has also been the v ery demonstrable recruitment
of psychopaths and narcissists into gov ernment administration at alllev els and law enforcement. If y ou w ant psychopathy hire
psychopaths and y ou get a simple cause and eﬀect. If y ou w ant
administrators, police oﬃcers and ‘leaders’ to perceiv e the public as
lesser beings who don’ t ma er then employ narcissists. These
personalities are identiﬁed using ‘psychometrics’ that identiﬁes
knowledge, abilities, a itudes and personality traits, mostly through
carefully-designed questionnaires and tests. As this policy has
passed through the decades w e hav e had pow er -crazy , pow er -
trippers appointed into law enforcement, security and gov ernment
administration in preparation for current times and the dynamic
betw een public and law enforcement/oﬃcialdom has been
transformed. UKColumn’ s Brian Gerrish said of the narcissistic
personality:
T h e i r  l o v e  o f  t h e m s e l v e s  a n d  p o w e r  a u t o m a t i c a l l y  m e a n s  t h a t  t h e y  w i l l  c r u s h  o t h e r s  w h o  g e t
i n  t h e i r  w a y .  I  r e c e i v e d  a  m a j o r  p i e c e  o f  t h e  p u z z l e  w h e n  a  f r i e n d  p o i n t e d  o u t  t h a t  w h e n  t h e y
m a d e  p u b l i c  o f f i c i a l s  r e - a p p l y  f o r  t h e i r  o w n  j o b s  s e v e r a l  y e a r s  a g o  t h e y  w e r e  a l s o  r e q u i r e d  t o
d o  p s y c h o m e t r i c  t e s t s .  T h i s  w a s  u n d o u b t e d l y  t h e  s t a r t  o f  t h e  s c r e e n i n g  p r o c e s s  t o  g e t  ‘ t h e i r ’
s o r t  o f  p e o p l e  i n  p o s t .
How obvious that has been since 2020 although it w as clear what
w as happening long before if people paid a ention to the changing
public-establishment dynamic.
Change agents
At the centre of ev ents in ‘Covid’ Britain is the National Health
Service (NHS) which has behav ed disgracefully in slavishly
following the Cult agenda. The NHS management structure is aw ash
with Common Purpose graduates or ‘change agents’ w orking to a
common cause. Helen Bev an, a Chief of Service T ransformation at
the NHS Institute for Innov ation and Improv ement, co-authored a
document called ‘T ow ards a million change agents, a review of the
social mov ements literature: implications for large scale change in
the NHS‘. The document compared a project management approach
to that of change and social mov ements where ‘people changethemselv es and each other – peer to peer ’. T w o deﬁnitions giv en for
a ‘social mov ement’ w ere:
A group of people who consciously attempt to build a radically new social
order; involves people of a broad range of social backgrounds; and deploys
politically confrontational and socially disruptive tactics  – Cyrus
Zirakzadeh 1997
Collective challenges, based on common purposes and social solidarities, in
sustained interaction with elites, opponents, and authorities  – Sidney
T arrow 1994
Helen Bev an wrote another NHS document in which she deﬁned
‘framing’ as ‘the process by which leaders construct, articulate and
put across their message in a pow erful and compelling w ay in order
to win people to their cause and call them to action’. I think I could
come up with another deﬁnition that w ould be rather more accurate.
The National Health Service and institutions of Britain and the wider
w orld hav e been taken ov er by reframed ‘change agents’ and that
includes ev erything from the United Nations to national
gov ernments, local councils and social services which hav e been
kidnapping children from loving parents on an extraordinary and
gathering scale on the road to the end of parenthood altogether .
Children from loving homes are stolen and kidnapped by the state
and put into the ‘care’ (inv ersion) of the local authority through
council homes, foster parents and forced adoption. At the same time
children are allow ed to be abused without response while many are
under council ‘care’. UKColumn highlighted the Common Purpose
connection betw een South Y orkshire P olice and Rotherham council
oﬃcers in the case of the scandal in that area of the sexual
exploitation of children to which the authorities turned not one blind
ey e, but both:W e  w e r e  a l a r m e d  t o  d i s c o v e r  t h a t  t h e  C h i e f  E x e c u t i v e ,  t h e  S t r a t e g i c  D i r e c t o r  o f  C h i l d r e n  a n d
Y o u n g  P e o p l e ’ s  S e r v i c e s ,  t h e  M a n a g e r  f o r  t h e  L o c a l  S t r a t e g i c  P a r t n e r s h i p ,  t h e  C o m m u n i t y
C o h e s i o n  M a n a g e r ,  t h e  C a b i n e t  M e m b e r  f o r  C o h e s i o n ,  t h e  C h i e f  C o n s t a b l e  a n d  h i s
p r e d e c e s s o r  h a d  a l l  a t t e n d e d  L e a d e r s h i p  t r a i n i n g  c o u r s e s  p r o v i d e d  b y  t h e  p s e u d o - c h a r i t y
C o m m o n  P u r p o s e .
Once ‘change agents’ hav e secured positions of hire and ﬁre within
any organisation things start to mov e v ery quickly . P ersonnel are
then hired and ﬁred on the basis of whether they will w ork tow ards
the agenda the change agent represents. If they do they are rapidly
promoted ev en though they may be incompetent. Those more
qualiﬁed and skilled who are pre-Common Purpose ‘old school’ see
their careers stall and ev en disappear . This has been happening for
decades in ev ery institution of state, police, ‘health’ and social
services and all of them hav e been transformed as a result in their
a itudes to their jobs and the public. Medical professions, including
nursing, which w ere once v ocations for the caring now employ
many cold, callous and couldn’ t giv e a shit personality types. The
UKColumn inv estigation concluded:
B y  b l u r r i n g  t h e  b o u n d a r i e s  b e t w e e n  p e o p l e ,  p r o f e s s i o n s ,  p u b l i c  a n d  p r i v a t e  s e c t o r s ,
r e s p o n s i b i l i t y  a n d  a c c o u n t a b i l i t y ,  C o m m o n  P u r p o s e  e n c o u r a g e s  ‘ g r a d u a t e s ’  t o  b e l i e v e  t h a t  a s
n e w  s e l e c t e d  l e a d e r s ,  t h e y  c a n  w o r k  t o g e t h e r ,  o u t s i d e  o f  t h e  e s t a b l i s h e d  p o l i t i c a l  a n d  s o c i a l
s t r u c t u r e s ,  t o  a c h i e v e  a  p a r a d i g m  s h i f t  o r  C H A N G E  –  s o  c a l l e d  ‘ L e a d i n g  B e y o n d  A u t h o r i t y ’ .  I n
d o i n g  s o ,  t h e  a l l e g i a n c e  o f  t h e  i n d i v i d u a l  b e c o m e s  ‘ r e f r a m e d ’  o n  C P  c o l l e a g u e s  a n d  t h e i r
N E T W O R K .
Reframing the Face-Nappies
Nowhere has this process been more obvious than in the police
where recruitment of psychopaths and dev elopment of
unquestioning mind-controlled group-thinkers hav e transformed
law enforcement into a politically-correct ‘W oke’ joke and a trav esty
of what should be public service. T oday they w ear their face-nappies
like good li le gofers and enforce ‘Covid’ rules which are fascism
under another name. Alongside the speciﬁcally-recruited
psychopaths w e hav e so w are minds incapable of free thought.
Brian Gerrish again:A n  e x a m p l e  i s  t h e  p o l i c e m a n  w h o  w o u l d  n o t  g e t  o n  a  b i k e  f o r  a  p r e s s  p h o t o  b e c a u s e  h e  h a d
n o t  d o n e  t h e  c y c l i n g  p r o f i c i e n c y  c o u r s e .  N o r m a l  p e o p l e  s a y  t h i s  i s  p o l i t i c a l  c o r r e c t n e s s  g o n e
m a d .  N o t h i n g  c o u l d  b e  f u r t h e r  f r o m  t h e  t r u t h .  T h e  p o l i c e m a n  h a s  b e e n  r e f r a m e d ,  a n d  i n  h i s
r e a l i t y  i t  i s  p e r f e c t  c o m m o n  s e n s e  n o t  t o  g e t  o n  t h e  b i k e  ‘ b e c a u s e  h e  h a s n ’ t  d o n e  t h e  c y c l i n g
c o u r s e ’ .
A n o t h e r  e x a m p l e  o f  t h i s  i s  w h e r e  t h e  p o l i c e  w o u l d  n o t  r e s c u e  a  b o y  f r o m  a  p o n d  u n t i l  t h e y
h a d  t a k e n  a d v i c e  f r o m  a b o v e  o n  t h e  ‘ r i s k  a s s e s s m e n t ’ .  A  n o r m a l  p e r s o n  w o u l d  h a v e  a r r i v e d ,
p e r h a p s  t h o u g h t  o f  t h e  r i s k  f o r  a  m o m e n t ,  a n d  d i v e d  i n .  T o  t h e  p o l i c e  n o w  ‘ r e f r a m e d ’ ,  t h e y
f o l l o w e d  ‘ n o r m a l ’  p r o c e d u r e .
There are shocking cases of reframed ambulance crews doing the
same. Sheer unthinking stupidity of London Face-Nappies headed
by Common Purpose graduate Cressida Dick can be seen in their
behaviour at a vigil in March, 2021, for a murdered w oman, Sarah
Ev erard. A police oﬃcer had been charged with the crime. Any one
with a brain w ould hav e le  the vigil alone in the circumstances.
Instead they ‘manhandled’ w omen to stop them breaking ‘Covid
rules’ to betray classic reframing. Minds in the thrall of perception
control hav e no capacity for seeing a situation on its merits and
acting accordingly . ‘Rules is rules’ is their only mind-set. My father
used to say that rules and regulations are for the guidance of the
intelligent and the blind obedience of the idiot. Most of the
intelligent, decent, coppers hav e gone leaving only the other kind
and a few old school for whom the job must be a daily nightmare.
The combination of psychopaths and rule-book so w are minds has
been clearly on public display in the ‘Covid’ era with automaton
robots in uniform imposing fascistic ‘Covid’ regulations on the
population without any personal initiativ e or judging situations on
their merits. There are thousands of examples around the w orld, but
I’ll make my point with the infamous Derbyshire police in the
English East Midlands – the ones who think pouring dy e into beauty
spots and using drones to track people w alking in the countryside
aw ay from any one is called ‘policing’. T o them there are rules
decreed by the gov ernment which they hav e to enforce and in their
bewildered state a group gathering in a closed space and someone
w alking alone in the countryside are the same thing. It is bey ond
idiocy and enters the realm of clinical insanity .P olice oﬃcers in Derbyshire said they w ere ‘horriﬁed’ – horrified  –
to ﬁnd 15 to 20 ‘irresponsible’ kids playing a football match at a
closed leisure centre ‘in breach of coronavirus restrictions’. When
they saw the police the kids ran aw ay leaving their belongings
behind and the reframed men and w omen of Derbyshire police w ere
seeking to establish their identities with a view to ﬁning their
parents. The most natural thing for y oungsters to do – kicking a ball
about – is turned into a criminal activity and enforced by the
moronic so w are programs of Derbyshire police. Y ou ﬁnd the same
mentality in ev ery country . These barely conscious ‘horriﬁed’ oﬃcers
said they had to take action because ‘w e need to ensure these rules
are being follow ed’ and ‘it is of the utmost importance that y ou
ensure y our children are following the rules and regulations for
Covid-19’. Had any of them done ten seconds of research to see if
this parroting of their masters’ script could be supported by any
evidence? Nope. Reframed people don’ t think – others think for
them and that’ s the whole idea of reframing. I hav e seen police
oﬃcers one a er the other repeating without question w ord for
w ord what oﬃcialdom tells them just as I hav e seen great sw athes of
the public doing the same. Ask either for ‘their ’ opinion and out
spews what they hav e been told to think by the oﬃcial narrativ e.
P olice and public may seem to be in diﬀerent groups, but their
mentality is the same. Most people do whatev er they are told in fear
not doing so or because they believ e what oﬃcialdom tells them;
almost the entirety of the police do what they are told for the same
reason. Ultimately it’ s the tiny inner core of the global Cult that’ s
telling both what to do.
So Derbyshire police w ere ‘horriﬁed’. Oh, really? Why did they
think those kids w ere playing football? It w as to reliev e the
psychological consequences of lockdown and being denied human
contact with their friends and interaction, touch and discourse vital
to human psychological health. Being denied this month a er month
has dismantled the psyche of many children and y oung people as
depression and suicide hav e exploded. W ere Derbyshire police
horrified  by that ? Are y ou kidding? Reframed people don’ t hav e thosemental and emotional processes that can see how the impact on the
psychological health of y oungsters is far more dangerous than any
‘virus’ ev en if y ou take the mendacious oﬃcial ﬁgures to be true. The
reframed are told (programmed) how to act and so they do. The
Derbyshire Chief Constable in the ﬁrst period of lockdown when the
black dy e and drones nonsense w as going on w as P eter Goodman.
He w as the man who sev ered the connection betw een his force and
the Derbyshire Constabulary Male Voice  Choir when he decided that
it w as not inclusiv e enough to allow w omen to join. The fact it w as a
male v oice choir making a particular sound produced by male v oices
seemed to elude a guy who terrifyingly ran policing in Derbyshire.
He retired w eeks a er his force w as condemned as disgraceful by
former Supreme Court Justice Jonathan Sumption for their
behaviour ov er extreme lockdown impositions. Goodman w as
replaced by his deputy Rachel Sw ann who w as in charge when her
oﬃcers w ere ‘horriﬁed’. The police statement ov er the boys
commi ing the hanging-oﬀence of playing football included the line
about the y oungsters being ‘irresponsible in the times w e are all
living through’ missing the point that the real relev ance of the ‘times
w e are all living through’ is the imposition of fascism enforced by
psychopaths and reframed minds of police oﬃcers playing such a
vital part in establishing the fascist tyranny that their own children
and grandchildren will hav e to liv e in their entire liv es. As a
deﬁnition of insanity that is hard to beat although it might be run
close by imposing masks on people that can hav e a serious eﬀect on
their health while w earing a face nappy all day themselv es. Once
again public and police do it for the same reason – the authorities tell
them to and who are they to hav e the self-respect to say no?
Wokers in uniform
How reframed do y ou hav e to be to arrest a six-year-old  and take him
to court for picking a flower  while w aiting for a bus? Brain dead police
and oﬃcialdom did just that in North Carolina where criminal
proceedings happen regularly for children under nine. A orney
Julie Boy er gav e the six-y ear -old cray ons and a colouring bookduring the ‘ﬂow er ’ hearing while the ‘adults’ decided his fate.
County Chief District Court Judge Jay Corpening asked: ‘Should a
child that believ es in Santa Claus, the Easter Bunny and the tooth
fairy be making life-altering decisions?’ W ell, of course not, but
common sense has no meaning when y ou hav e a common purpose
and a reframed mind. T reating children in this w ay , and police
operating in American schools, is all part of the psychological
preparation for children to accept a police state as normal all their
adult liv es. The same goes for all the cameras and biometric tracking
technology in schools. P olice training is focused on reframing them
as snowﬂake W okers and this is happening in the military . P entagon
top brass said that ‘training sessions on extremism’ w ere needed for
troops who asked why they w ere so focused on the Capitol Building
riot when Black Liv es Ma er riots w ere ignored. What’ s the
diﬀerence betw een them some apparently and rightly asked.
Actually , there is a diﬀerence. Fiv e people died in the Capitol riot,
only one through violence, and that w as a police oﬃcer shooting an
unarmed protestor . BLM riots killed at least 25 people and cost
billions. Asking the question prompted the psychopaths and
reframed minds that run the P entagon to say that more ‘education’
(programming) w as needed. T roop training is all based on
psychological programming to make them fodder for the Cult –
‘Military men are just dumb, stupid animals to be used as pawns in
foreign policy’ as Cult-to-his-DNA former Secretary of State Henry
Kissinger famously said. Gov ernments see the police in similar terms
and it’ s time for those among them who can see this to defend the
people and stop being enforcers of the Cult agenda upon the people.
The US military , like the country itself, is being targeted for
destruction through a long list of W oke impositions. Cult-owned
gaga ‘President’ Biden signed an executiv e order when he took oﬃce
to allow taxpay er money to pay for transgender surgery for activ e
military personnel and v eterans. Are y ou a man soldier? No, I’ m a
LGBTQIA+ with a hint of Skoliosexual and Spectrasexual. Oh, good
man. Bad choice of w ords y ou bigot. The P entagon announced in
March, 2021, the appointment of the ﬁrst ‘div ersity and inclusionoﬃcer ’ for US Special Forces. Richard T orres-Estrada arriv ed with
the publication of a ‘D&I Strategic Plan which will guide the
enterprise-wide eﬀort to institutionalize and sustain D&I’. If y ou
think a Special Forces ‘Strategic Plan’ should hav e something to do
with defending America y ou hav en’ t been paying a ention.
Defending W oke is now the military’ s new role. T orres-Estrada has
posted images comparing Donald T rump with Adolf Hitler and w e
can expect no bias from him as a representativ e of the supposedly
non-political P entagon. Cable news host T ucker Carlson said: ‘The
P entagon is now the Y ale faculty lounge but with cruise missiles.’
Meanwhile Secretary of Defense Lloyd Austin, a board member of
w eapons-maker Raytheon with stock and compensation interests in
October , 2020, w orth $1.4 million, said he w as purging the military
of the ‘enemy within’ – any one who isn’ t W oke and supports Donald
T rump. Austin refers to his targets as ‘racist extremists’ while in true
W oke fashion being himself a racist extremist. P entagon documents
pledge to ‘eradicate, eliminate and conquer all forms of racism,
sexism and homophobia’. The deﬁnitions of these are decided by
‘div ersity and inclusion commi ees’ peopled by those who see
racism, sexism and homophobia in ev ery situation and opinion.
W oke (the Cult) is dismantling the US military and purging
testosterone as China expands its military and giv es its troops
‘masculinity training’. How do w e think that is going to end when
this is all Cult coordinated? The US military , like the British military ,
is controlled by W oke and spineless top brass who just go along with
it out of personal career interests.
‘Woke’ means fast asleep
Mind control and perception manipulation techniques used on
individuals to create group-think hav e been unleashed on the global
population in general. As a result many hav e no capacity to see the
obvious fascist agenda being installed all around them or what
‘Covid’ is really all about. Their brains are ﬁrew alled like a computer
system not to process certain concepts, thoughts and realisations that
are bad for the Cult. The y oung are most targeted as the adults theywill be when the whole fascist global state is planned to be fully
implemented. They need to be prepared for total compliance to
eliminate all pushback from entire generations. The Cult has been
pouring billions into taking complete control of ‘education’ from
schools to univ ersities via its operativ es and corporations and not
least Bill Gates as alw ays. The plan has been to transform ‘education’
institutions into programming centres for the mentality of ‘W oke’.
James McConnell, professor of psychology at the Univ ersity of
Michigan, wrote in Psychology Today  in 1970:
T h e  d a y  h a s  c o m e  w h e n  w e  c a n  c o m b i n e  s e n s o r y  d e p r i v a t i o n  w i t h  d r u g s ,  h y p n o s i s ,  a n d
a s t u t e  m a n i p u l a t i o n  o f  r e w a r d  a n d  p u n i s h m e n t ,  t o  g a i n  a l m o s t  a b s o l u t e  c o n t r o l  o v e r  a n
i n d i v i d u a l ’ s  b e h a v i o u r .  I t  s h o u l d  t h e n  b e  p o s s i b l e  t o  a c h i e v e  a  v e r y  r a p i d  a n d  h i g h l y  e f f e c t i v e
t y p e  o f  b r a i n w a s h i n g  t h a t  w o u l d  a l l o w  u s  t o  m a k e  d r a m a t i c  c h a n g e s  i n  a  p e r s o n ’ s  b e h a v i o u r
a n d  p e r s o n a l i t y  . . .
…  W e  s h o u l d  r e s h a p e  s o c i e t y  s o  t h a t  w e  a l l  w o u l d  b e  t r a i n e d  f r o m  b i r t h  t o  w a n t  t o  d o  w h a t
s o c i e t y  w a n t s  u s  t o  d o .  W e  h a v e  t h e  t e c h n i q u e s  t o  d o  i t . . .  n o - o n e  o w n s  h i s  o w n  p e r s o n a l i t y
y o u  a c q u i r e d ,  a n d  t h e r e ’ s  n o  r e a s o n  t o  b e l i e v e  y o u  s h o u l d  h a v e  t h e  r i g h t  t o  r e f u s e  t o  a c q u i r e  a
n e w  p e r s o n a l i t y  i f  y o u r  o l d  o n e  i s  a n t i - s o c i a l .
This w as the potential for mass brainw ashing in 1970 and the
mentality there display ed captures the arrogant psychopathy that
driv es it forw ard. I emphasise that not all y oung people hav e
succumbed to W oke programming and those that hav en’ t are
incredibly impressiv e people giv en that today’ s y oung are the most
perceptually-targeted generations in history with all the technology
now inv olv ed. V ast sw athes of the y oung generations, how ev er , hav e
fallen into the spell – and that’ s what it is – of W oke. The W oke
mentality and perceptual program is founded on inversion  and y ou
will appreciate later why that is so signiﬁcant. Ev erything with W oke
is inv erted and the opposite of what it is claimed to be. W oke w as a
term used in African-American culture from the 1900s and referred
to an aw areness of social and racial justice. This is not the meaning
of the modern v ersion or ‘New W oke’ as I call it in The Answer . Oh,
no, W oke today means something v ery diﬀerent no ma er how
much W okers may seek to hide that and insist Old W oke and New•
•
•
•
•W oke are the same. See if y ou ﬁnd any ‘aw areness of social justice’
here in the modern v ariety:
W oke demands ‘inclusivity’ while excluding any one with a
diﬀerent opinion and calls for mass censorship to silence other
views.
W oke claims to stand against oppression when imposing
oppression is the foundation of all that it does. It is the driv er of
political correctness which is nothing more than a Cult inv ention
to manipulate the population to silence itself.
W oke believ es itself to be ‘liberal’ while pursuing a global society
that can only be described as fascist (see ‘anti-fascist’ fascist
Antifa).
W oke calls for ‘social justice’ while spreading injustice wherev er it
goes against the common ‘enemy’ which can be easily identiﬁed
as a diﬀering view .
W oke is supposed to be a metaphor for ‘aw ake’ when it is solid-
gold asleep and deep in a Cult-induced coma that meets the
criteria for ‘oﬀ with the fairies’.
I state these points as obvious facts if people only care to look. I
don’ t do this with a sense of condemnation. W e need to appreciate
that the onslaught of perceptual programming on the y oung has
been incessant and merciless. I can understand why so many hav e
been reframed, or , giv en their y outh, framed from the start to see the
w orld as the Cult demands. The Cult has had access to their minds
day a er day in its ‘education’ system for their entire formativ e
y ears. P erception is formed from information receiv ed and the Cult-
created system is a life-long download of information deliv ered to
elicit a particular perception, thus behaviour . The more this has
expanded into still new extremes in recent decades and ev er -
increasing censorship has deleted other opinions and information
why w ouldn’ t that lead to a perceptual reframing on a mass scale? Ihav e described already cradle-to-grav e programming and in more
recent times the targeting of y oung minds from birth to adulthood
has entered the stratosphere. This has taken the form of skewing
what is ‘taught’ to ﬁt the Cult agenda and the omnipresent
techniques of group-think to isolate non-believ ers and pressure them
into line. There has alw ays been a tendency to follow the herd, but
w e really are in a new w orld now in relation to that. W e hav e parents
who can see the ‘Covid’ hoax told by their children not to stop them
w earing masks at school, being ‘Covid’ tested or having the ‘v accine’
in fear of the peer -pressure consequences of being diﬀerent. What is
‘peer -pressure’ if not pressure to conform to group-think? Renegade
Minds nev er group-think and alw ays retain a set of perceptions that
are unique to them. Group-think is alw ays underpinned by
consequences for not group-thinking. Abuse now aimed at those
refusing DNA-manipulating ‘Covid v accines’ are a potent example
of this. The biggest pressure to conform comes from the v ery group
which is itself being manipulated. ‘I am programmed to be part of a
hiv e mind and so y ou must be.’
W oke control structures in ‘education’ now apply to ev ery
mainstream organisation. Those at the top of the ‘education’
hierarchy (the Cult) decide the policy . This is imposed on
gov ernments through the Cult netw ork; gov ernments impose it on
schools, colleges and univ ersities; their leadership impose the policy
on teachers and academics and they impose it on children and
students. At any lev el where there is resistance, perhaps from a
teacher or univ ersity lecturer , they are targeted by the authorities
and o en ﬁred. Students themselv es regularly demand the dismissal
of academics (increasingly few) at odds with the narrativ e that the
students hav e been programmed to believ e in. It is quite a thought
that students who are being targeted by the Cult become so
consumed by programmed group-think that they launch protests
and demand the remov al of those who are trying to push back
against those targeting the students. Such is the scale of perceptual
inv ersion. W e see this with ‘Covid’ programming as the Cult
imposes the rules via psycho-psychologists and gov ernments onshops, transport companies and businesses which impose them on
their staﬀ who impose them on their customers who pressure
Pushbackers to conform to the will of the Cult which is in the
process of destroying them and their families. Scan all aspects of
society and y ou will see the same sequence ev ery time.
Fact free Woke and hijacking the ‘left’
There is no more potent example of this than ‘W oke’, a mentality
only made possible by the deletion of factual evidence by an
‘education’ system seeking to produce an ev er more uniform society .
Why w ould y ou bother with facts when y ou don’ t know any?
Deletion of credible history both in v olume and type is highly
relev ant. Orw ell said: ‘Who controls the past controls the future:
who controls the present controls the past.’ They who control the
perception of the past control the perception of the future and they
who control the present control the perception of the past through
the writing and deleting of history . Why w ould y ou oppose the
imposition of Marxism in the name of W okeism when y ou don’ t
know that Marxism cost at least 100 million liv es in the 20th century
alone? W atch videos and read reports in which W oker generations
are asked basic historical questions – it’ s mind-blowing. A surv ey of
2,000 people found that six percent of millennials (born
approximately early1980s to early 2000s) believ ed the Second W orld
W ar (1939-1945) broke out with the assassination of President
Kennedy (in 1963) and one in ten thought Margaret Thatcher w as
British Prime Minister at the time. She w as in oﬃce betw een 1979
and 1990. W e are in a post-fact society . Prov able facts are no defence
against the fascism of political correctness or Silicon V alley
censorship. Facts don’ t ma er anymore as w e hav e witnessed with
the ‘Covid’ hoax. Sacriﬁcing uniqueness to the W oke group-think
religion is all y ou are required to do and that means thinking for
y ourself is the biggest W oke no, no. All religions are an expression of
group-think and censorship and W oke is just another religion with
an orthodoxy defended by group-think and censorship. Burned atthe stake becomes burned on T wi er which leads back ev entually to
burned at the stake as W oke humanity regresses to ages past.
The biggest W oke inv ersion of all is its creators and funders. I
grew up in a traditional le  of centre political household on a
council estate in Leicester in the 1950s and 60s – y ou know , the le 
that challenged the pow er of w ealth-hoarding elites and threats to
freedom of speech and opinion. In those days students w ent on
marches defending freedom of speech while today’ s W okers march
for its deletion. What on earth could hav e happened? Those v ery
elites (collectiv ely the Cult) that w e opposed in my y outh and early
life hav e funded into existence the antithesis of that former le  and
hĳacked the ‘brand’ while inv erting ev erything it ev er stood for . W e
hav e a mentality that calls itself ‘liberal’ and ‘progressiv e’ while
acting like fascists. Cult billionaires and their corporations hav e
funded themselv es into control of ‘education’ to ensure that W oke
programming is unceasing throughout the formativ e y ears of
children and y oung people and that non- W okers are isolated (that
w ord again) whether they be students, teachers or college professors.
The Cult has funded into existence the now colossal global netw ork
of W oke organisations that hav e spawned and promoted all the
‘causes’ on the Cult wish-list for global transformation and turned
W okers into demanders of them. Does any one really think it’ s a
coincidence that the Cult agenda for humanity is a carbon (sorry)
copy of the societal transformations desired by W oke?? These are
only some of them:
Political correctness:  The means by which the Cult deletes all public
debates that it knows it cannot win if w e had the free-ﬂow of
information and evidence.
Human-caused ‘climate change’:  The means by which the Cult
seeks to transform society into a globally-controlled dictatorship
imposing its will ov er the ﬁne detail of ev ery one’ s liv es ‘to sav e the
planet’ which doesn’ t actually need saving.Transgender obsession:  Preparing collectiv e perception to accept the
‘new human’ which w ould not hav e genders because it w ould be
created technologically and not through procreation. I’ll hav e much
more on this in Human 2.0.
Race obsession:  The means by which the Cult seeks to divide and
rule the population by triggering racial division through the
perception that society is more racist than ev er when the opposite is
the case. Is it perfect in that regard? No. But to compare today with
the racism of apartheid and segregation brought to an end by the
civil rights mov ement in the 1960s is to insult the memory of that
mov ement and inspirations like Martin Luther King. Why is the
‘anti-racism’ industry (which it is) so dominated by privileged white
people?
White supremacy:  This is a label used by privileged white people to
demonise poor and depriv ed white people pushing back on tyranny
to marginalise and destroy them. White people are being especially
targeted as the dominant race by number within W estern society
which the Cult seeks to transform in its image. If y ou w ant to change
a society y ou must w eaken and undermine its biggest group and
once y ou hav e done that by using the other groups y ou next turn on
them to do the same … ‘Then they came for the Jews and I w as not a
Jew so I did nothing.’
Mass migration:  The mass mov ement of people from the Middle
East, Africa and Asia into Europe, from the south into the United
States and from Asia into Australia are another w ay the Cult seeks to
dilute the racial, cultural and political inﬂuence of white people on
W estern society . White people ask why their gov ernments appear to
be w orking against them while being politically and culturally
biased tow ards incoming cultures. W ell, here’ s y our answ er . In the
same w ay sexually ‘straight’ people, men and w omen, ask why theauthorities are biased against them in fav our of other sexualities. The
answ er is the same – that’ s the w ay the Cult w ants it to be for v ery
sinister motiv es.
These are all central parts of the Cult agenda and central parts of the
W oke agenda and W oke w as created and continues to be funded to
an immense degree by Cult billionaires and corporations. If any one
begins to say ‘coincidence’ the syllables should stick in their throat.
Billionaire ‘social justice warriors’
Joe Biden is a 100 percent-owned asset of the Cult and the W okers’
man in the White House whenev er he can remember his name and
for how ev er long he lasts with his rapidly diminishing cognitiv e
function. Ev en w alking up the steps of an aircra  without falling on
his arse w ould appear to be a challenge. He’ s not an empty-shell
puppet or anything. From the minute Biden took oﬃce (or the Cult
did) he began his executiv e orders promoting the W oke wish-list.
Y ou will see the W oke agenda imposed ev er more sev erely because
it’ s really the Cult  agenda. W oke organisations and activist netw orks
spawned by the Cult are funded to the extreme so long as they
promote what the Cult w ants to happen. W oke is funded to promote
‘social justice’ by billionaires who become billionaires by destroying
social justice. The social justice mantra is only a cov er for
dismantling social justice and funded by billionaires that couldn’ t
giv e a damn about social justice. Ev erything makes sense when y ou
see that. One of W oke’ s premier funders is Cult billionaire ﬁnancier
George Soros who said: ‘I am basically there to make money , I
cannot and do not look at the social consequences of what I do.’ This
is the same Soros who has giv en more than $32 billion to his Open
Society Foundations global W oke netw ork and funded Black Liv es
Ma er , mass immigration into Europe and the United States,
transgender activism, climate change activism, political correctness
and groups targeting ‘white supremacy’ in the form of privileged
white thugs that dominate Antifa. What a scam it all is and wheny ou are dealing with the unquestioning fact-free zone of W oke
scamming them is child’ s play . All y ou need to pull it oﬀ in all these
organisations are a few in-the-know agents of the Cult and an army
of naïv e, reframed, uninformed, narcissistic, know-nothings
convinced of their own self-righteousness, self-purity and virtue.
Soros and fellow billionaires and billionaire corporations hav e
poured hundreds of millions into Black Liv es Ma er and connected
groups and promoted them to a global audience. None of this is
motiv ated by caring about black people. These are the billionaires
that hav e controlled and exploited a system that leav es millions of
black people in abject pov erty and depriv ation which they do
absolutely nothing to address. The same Cult netw orks funding
BLM w ere behind the slave trade!  Black Liv es Ma er hĳacked a
phrase that few w ould challenge and they hav e turned this laudable
concept into a political w eapon to divide society . Y ou know that
BLM is a fraud when it claims that All  Liv es Ma er , the most
inclusiv e statement of all, is ‘racist’. BLM and its Cult masters don’ t
w ant to end racism. T o them it’ s a means to an end to control all of
humanity nev er mind the colour , creed, culture or background.
What has destroying the nuclear family got to do with ending
racism? Nothing – but that is one of the goals of BLM and also
happens to be a goal of the Cult as I hav e been exposing in my books
for decades. Stealing children from loving parents and giving
schools ev er more pow er to ov erride parents is part of that same
agenda. BLM is a Marxist organisation and why w ould that not be
the case when the Cult created Marxism and  BLM? P atrisse Cullors, a
BLM co-founder , said in a 2015 video that she and her fellow
organisers, including co-founder Alicia Garza, are ‘trained Marxists’.
The lady known a er marriage as P atrisse Khan-Cullors bought a
$1.4 million home in 2021 in one of the whitest areas of California
with a black population of just 1.6 per cent and has so far bought four
high-end homes for a total of $3.2 million. How v ery Marxist. There
must be a bit of spare in the BLM coﬀers, how ev er , when Cult
corporations and billionaires hav e handed ov er the best part of $100
million. Many black people can see that Black Liv es Ma er is notw orking for them, but against them, and this is still more
conﬁrmation. Black journalist Jason Whitlock, who had his account
suspended by T wi er for simply linking to the story about the
‘Marxist’ s’ home buying spree, said that BLM leaders are ‘making
millions of dollars oﬀ the backs of these dead black men who they
w ouldn’ t spit on if they w ere on ﬁre and aliv e’.
Black Lies Matter
Cult assets and agencies came together to promote BLM in the w ake
of the death of career criminal George Floyd who had been jailed a
number of times including for forcing his w ay into the home of a
black w oman with others in a raid in which a gun w as pointed at her
stomach. Floyd w as ﬁlmed being held in a Minneapolis street in 2020
with the knee of a police oﬃcer on his neck and he subsequently
died. It w as an appalling thing for the oﬃcer to do, but the same
technique has been used by police on peaceful protestors of
lockdown without any outcry from the W oke brigade. As
unquestioning supporters of the Cult agenda W okers hav e
supported lockdown and all the ‘Covid’ claptrap while a acking
any one standing up to the tyranny imposed in its name. Court
documents w ould later include details of an autopsy on Floyd by
County Medical Examiner Dr Andrew Baker who concluded that
Floyd had taken a fatal lev el of the drug fentanyl. None of this
ma ered to fact-free, question-free, W oke. Floyd’ s death w as
follow ed by w orldwide protests against police brutality amid calls to
defund the police. Throwing babies out with the bathw ater is a
W oke speciality . In the w ake of the murder of British w oman Sarah
Ev erard a Green P arty member of the House of Lords, Baroness
Jones of Moulescoomb (Nincompoopia w ould hav e been be er),
called for a 6pm curfew for all men. This w ould be in breach of the
Genev a Conv entions on w ar crimes which ban collectiv e
punishment, but that w ould nev er hav e crossed the black and white
W oke mind of Baroness Nincompoopia who w ould hav e been far
too convinced of her own self-righteousness to compute such details.
Many American cities did defund the police in the face of Floyd riotsand a er $15 million w as deleted from the police budget in
W ashington DC under useless W oke may or Muriel Bowser car -
jacking alone rose by 300 percent and within six months the US
capital recorded its highest murder rate in 15 y ears. The same
happened in Chicago and other cities in line with the Cult/Soros
plan to bring fear to streets and neighbourhoods by reducing the
police, releasing violent criminals and not prosecuting crime. This is
the mob-rule agenda that I hav e w arned in the books w as coming for
so long. Shootings in the area of Minneapolis where Floyd w as
arrested increased by 2,500 percent compared with the y ear before.
Defunding the police ov er George Floyd has led to a big increase in
dead people with many of them black. P olice protection for
politicians making these decisions stay ed the same or increased as
y ou w ould expect from professional hypocrites. The Cult doesn’ t
actually w ant to abolish the police. It w ants to abolish local control
ov er the police and hand it to federal gov ernment as the
psychopaths adv ance the Hunger Games Society . Many George
Floyd protests turned into violent riots with black stores and
businesses destroy ed by ﬁre and looting across America fuelled by
Black Liv es Ma er . W oke doesn’ t do irony . If y ou w ant civil rights
y ou must loot the liquor store and the supermarket and make oﬀ
with a smart TV . It’ s the only w ay .
It’s not a race war – it’s a class war
Black people are patronised by privileged blacks and whites alike
and told they are victims of white supremacy . I ﬁnd it extraordinary
to w atch privileged blacks supporting the v ery system and bloodline
netw orks behind the slav e trade and parroting the same Cult-serving
manipulativ e crap of their privileged white, o en billionaire,
associates. It is indeed not a race w ar but a class w ar and colour is
just a div ersion. Black Senator Cory Booker and black
Congressw oman Maxine W aters, more residents of Nincompoopia,
personify this. Once y ou tell people they are victims of someone else
y ou dev alue both their own responsibility for their plight and the
pow er they hav e to impact on their reality and experience. Insteadw e hav e: ‘Y ou are only in y our situation because of whitey – turn on
them and ev erything will change.’ It w on’ t change. Nothing changes
in our liv es unless we  change it. Crucial to that is nev er seeing
y ourself as a victim and alw ays as the creator of y our reality . Life is a
simple sequence of choice and consequence. Make diﬀerent choices
and y ou create diﬀerent consequences. You  hav e to make those
choices – not Black Liv es Ma er , the W oke Maﬁa and any one else
that seeks to dictate y our life. Who are they these W okers, an
emotional and psychological road traﬃc accident, to tell y ou what to
do? P ersonal empow erment is the last thing the Cult and its Black
Liv es Ma er w ant black people or any one else to hav e. They claim to
be defending the underdog while creating  and perpetuating the
underdog. The Cult’ s w orst nightmare is human unity and if they
are going to keep blacks, whites and ev ery other race under
economic servitude and control then the focus must be div erted
from what they hav e in common to what they can be manipulated to
believ e divides them. Blacks hav e to be told that their pov erty and
plight is the fault of the white bloke living on the street in the same
pov erty and with the same plight they are experiencing. The
diﬀerence is that y our plight black people is due to him, a white
supremacist with ‘white privilege’ living on the street. Don’ t unite as
one human family against y our mutual oppressors and suppressors
– ﬁght the oppressor with the white face who is as ﬁnancially
depriv ed as y ou are. The Cult knows that as its ‘Covid’ agenda
mov es into still new lev els of extremism people are going to respond
and it has been spreading the seeds of disunity ev erywhere to stop a
united response to the evil that targets all of us .
Racist a acks on ‘whiteness’ are ge ing ev er more outrageous and
especially through the American Democratic P arty which has an
appalling history for anti-black racism. Barack Obama, Joe Biden,
Hillary Clinton and Nancy P elosi all eulogised about Senator Robert
Byrd at his funeral in 2010 a er a nearly 60-y ear career in Congress.
Byrd w as a brutal Ku Klux Klan racist and a violent abuser of Cathy
O’Brien in MKUltra. He said he w ould nev er ﬁght in the military
‘with a negro by my side’ and ‘rather I should die a thousand times,and see Old Glory trampled in the dirt nev er to rise again, than to
see this belov ed land of ours become degraded by race mongrels, a
throwback to the blackest specimen from the wilds’. Biden called
Byrd a ‘v ery close friend and mentor ’. These ‘W oke’ hypocrites are
not anti-racist they are anti-poor and anti-people not of their
perceiv ed class. Here is an illustration of the scale of anti-white
racism to which w e hav e now descended. Seriously W oke and
moronic New York Times  contributor Damon Y oung described
whiteness as a ‘virus’ that ‘like other viruses will not die until there
are no bodies le  for it to infect’. He w ent on: ‘… the only w ay to
stop it is to locate it, isolate it, extract it, and kill it.’ Y oung can say
that as a black man with no consequences when a white man saying
the same in rev erse w ould be facing a jail sentence. That’s  racism. W e
had super - W oke numbskull senators T ammy Duckw orth and Mazie
Hirono saying they w ould object to future Biden Cabinet
appointments if he did not nominate more Asian Americans and
P aciﬁc Islanders. Nev er mind the ability of the candidate what do
they look like? Duckw orth said: ‘I will v ote for racial minorities and I
will v ote for LGBTQ, but any one else I’ m not v oting for .’ Appointing
people on the grounds of race is illegal, but that w as not a problem
for this ludicrous pair . They w ere on-message and that’ s a free pass
in any situation.
Critical race racism
White children are told at school they are intrinsically racist as they
are taught the divisiv e ‘critical race theory’. This claims that the law
and legal institutions are inherently racist and that race is a socially
constructed concept used by white people to further their economic
and political interests at the expense of people of colour . White is a
‘virus’ as w e’v e seen. Racial inequality results from ‘social,
economic, and legal diﬀerences that white people create betw een
races to maintain white interests which leads to pov erty and
criminality in minority communities‘. I must tell that to the white
guy sleeping on the street. The principal of East Side Community
School in New Y ork sent white parents a manifesto that called onthem to become ‘white traitors’ and adv ocate for full ‘white
abolition’. These people are teaching y our kids when they urgently
need a psychiatrist. The ‘school’ included a chart with ‘eight white
identities’ that ranged from ‘white supremacist’ to ‘white abolition’
and deﬁned the behaviour white people must follow to end ‘the
regime of whiteness’. W oke blacks and their privileged white
associates are acting exactly like the slav e owners of old and Ku Klux
Klan racists like Robert Byrd. They are too full of their own self-
purity to see that, but it’ s true. Racism is not a body type; it’ s a state
of mind that can manifest through any colour , creed or culture.
Another racial fraud is ‘equity’ . Not equality of treatment and
opportunity – equity . It’ s a term spun as equality when it means
something v ery diﬀerent. Equality in its true sense is a raising up
while ‘equity’ is a race to the bo om. Ev ery one in the same lev el of
pov erty is ‘equity’. Keep ev ery one down – that’ s equity . The Cult
doesn’ t w ant any one in the human family to be empow ered and
BLM leaders, like all these ‘anti-racist’ organisations, continue their
privileged, pampered existence by perpetuating the perception of
gathering racism. When is the last time y ou heard an ‘anti-racist’ or
‘anti-Semitism’ organisation say that acts of racism and
discrimination hav e fallen?  It’ s not in the interests of their fund-
raising and pow er to inﬂuence and the same goes for the
professional soccer anti-racism operation, Kick It Out. T w o things
conﬁrmed that the Black Liv es Ma er riots in the summer of 2020
w ere Cult creations. One w as that while anti-lockdown protests w ere
condemned in this same period for ‘transmi ing ‘Covid’ the
authorities supported mass gatherings of Black Liv es Ma er
supporters. I ev en saw self-deluding people claiming to be doctors
say the tw o types of protest w ere not the same. No – the non-existent
‘Covid’ w as in fav our of lockdowns and a acked those that
protested against them while ‘Covid’ supported Black Liv es Ma er
and kept w ell aw ay from its protests. The whole thing w as a joke
and as lockdown protestors w ere arrested, o en brutally , by
reframed Face-Nappies w e had the grotesque sight of police oﬃcers
taking the knee to Black Liv es Ma er , a Cult-funded Marxistorganisation that supports violent riots and w ants to destroy the
nuclear family and white people.
He’s not white? Shucks!
W oke obsession with race w as on display again when ten people
w ere shot dead in Boulder , Colorado, in March, 2021. Cult-owned
W oke TV channels like CNN said the shooter appeared to be a white
man and W okers w ere on T wi er condemning ‘violent white men’
with the usual mantras. Then the shooter ’ s name w as released as
Ahmad Al Aliwi Alissa, an anti- T rump Arab-American, and the sigh
of disappointment could be heard ﬁv e miles aw ay . Nev er mind that
ten people w ere dead and what that meant for their families. Race
baiting w as all that ma ered to these sick Cult-serving people like
Barack Obama who exploited the deaths to further divide America
on racial grounds which is his job for the Cult. This is the man that
‘racist’ white Americans made the ﬁrst black president of the United
States and then gav e him a second term. Not-v ery-bright Obama has
become ﬁlthy rich on the back of that and today appears to hav e a
big inﬂuence on the Biden administration. Ev en so he’ s still a
downtrodden black man and a victim of white supremacy . This
disingenuous fraud rev eals the contempt he has for black people
when he puts on a Deep South Alabama accent whenev er he talks to
them, no, at  them.
Another BLM red ﬂag w as how the now fully- W oke (fully-Cult)
and fully-virtue-signalled professional soccer authorities had their
teams taking the knee before ev ery match in support of Marxist
Black Liv es Ma er . Soccer authorities and clubs display ed ‘Black
Liv es Ma er ’ on the play ers’ shirts and ﬂashed the name on
electronic billboards around the pitch. Any fans that condemned
what is a Freemasonic taking-the-knee ritual w ere widely
condemned as y ou w ould expect from the W oke virtue-signallers of
professional sport and the now fully- W oke media. W e hav e rev erse
racism in which y ou are banned from criticising any race or culture
except for white people for whom anything goes – say what y ou like,
no problem. What has this got to do with racial harmony andequality? W e’v e had black supremacists from Black Liv es Ma er
telling white people to fall to their knees in the street and apologise
for their white supremacy . Black supremacists acting like white
supremacist slav e owners of the past couldn’ t breach their self-
obsessed, race-obsessed sense of self-purity . Joe Biden appointed a
race-obsessed black supremacist Kristen Clarke to head the Justice
Department Civil Rights Division. Clarke claimed that blacks are
endow ed with ‘greater mental, physical and spiritual abilities’ than
whites. If any one rev ersed that statement they w ould be viliﬁed.
Clarke is on-message so no problem. She’ s nev er seen a black-white
situation in which the black ﬁgure is anything but a virtuous victim
and she heads the Civil Rights Division which should treat ev ery one
the same or it isn’ t civil rights. Another perception of the Renegade
Mind: If something or someone is part of the Cult agenda they will
be supported by W oke gov ernments and media no ma er what. If
they’ re not, they will be condemned and censored. It really is that
simple and so racist Clarke prospers despite (make that because of )
her racism.
The end of culture
Biden’ s administration is full of such racial, cultural and economic
bias as the Cult requires the human family to be divided into
w arring factions. W e are now seeing racially-segregated graduations
and ev erything, but ev erything, is deﬁned through the lens of
perceiv ed ‘racism. W e hav e ‘racist’ mathematics, ‘racist’ food and
ev en ‘racist’ plants . W orld famous Kew Gardens in London said it
w as changing labels on plants and ﬂow ers to tell its pre-‘Covid’
more than tw o million visitors a y ear how racist they are. Kew
director Richard Dev erell said this w as part of an eﬀort to ‘mov e
quickly to decolonise collections’ a er they w ere approached by one
Ajay Chhabra ‘an actor with an insight into how sugar cane w as
linked to slav ery’. They are plants  y ou idiots. ‘Decolonisation’ in the
W oke manual really means colonisation of society with its mentality
and by extension colonisation by the Cult. W e are witnessing a new
Chinese-style ‘Cultural Rev olution’ so essential to the success of allMarxist takeov ers. Our cultural past and traditions hav e to be sw ept
aw ay to allow a new culture to be built-back-be er . W oke targeting
of long-standing W estern cultural pillars including historical
monuments and cancelling of historical ﬁgures is what happened in
the Mao rev olution in China which ‘purged remnants of capitalist
and traditional elements from Chinese society‘ and installed Maoism
as the dominant ideology‘. For China see the W estern w orld today
and for ‘dominant ideology’ see W oke. Be er still see Marxism or
Maoism. The ‘Covid’ hoax has speciﬁcally sought to destroy the arts
and all elements of W estern culture from people meeting in a pub or
restaurant to closing theatres, music v enues, sports stadiums, places
of w orship and ev en banning singing . Destruction of W estern society
is also why criticism of any religion is banned except for Christianity
which again is the dominant religion as white is the numerically-
dominant race. Christianity may be fading rapidly , but its history
and traditions are w eav ed through the fabric of W estern society .
Delete the pillars and other structures will follow until the whole
thing collapses. I am not a Christian defending that religion when I
say that. I hav e no religion. It’ s just a fact. T o this end Christianity
has itself been turned W oke to usher its own downfall and its ranks
are aw ash with ‘change agents’ – knowing and unknowing – at
ev ery lev el including P ope Francis ( definitely  knowing) and the
clueless Archbishop of Canterbury Justin W elby (possibly not, but
who can be sure?). W oke seeks to coordinate a acks on W estern
culture, traditions, and w ays of life through ‘intersectionality’
deﬁned as ‘the complex, cumulativ e w ay in which the eﬀects of
multiple forms of discrimination (such as racism, sexism, and
classism) combine, ov erlap, or intersect especially in the experiences
of marginalised individuals or groups’. W ade through the Orw ellian
W oke-speak and this means coordinating disparate groups in a
common cause to ov erthrow freedom and liberal v alues.
The entire structure of public institutions has been infested with
W oke – gov ernment at all lev els, political parties, police, military ,
schools, univ ersities, adv ertising, media and trade unions. This
abomination has been achiev ed through the Cult w eb by appointingW okers to positions of pow er and ba ering non- W okers into line
through intimidation, isolation and threats to their job. Many hav e
been ﬁred in the w ake of the empathy-deleted, vicious hostility of
‘social justice’ W okers and the desire of gutless, spineless employ ers
to virtue-signal their W okeness. Corporations are ﬁlled with W okers
today , most notably those in Silicon V alley . Ironically at the top they
are not W oke at all. They are only exploiting the mentality their Cult
masters hav e created and funded to censor and enslav e while the
W okers cheer them on until it’ s their turn. Thus the W oke ‘liberal
le ’ is an inv ersion of the traditional liberal le . Campaigning for
justice on the grounds of pow er and w ealth distribution has been
replaced by campaigning for identity politics. The genuine
traditional le  w ould nev er hav e taken money from today’ s
billionaire abusers of fairness and justice and nor w ould the
billionaires hav e w anted to fund that genuine le . It w ould not hav e
been in their interests to do so. The division of opinion in those days
w as betw een the hav es and hav e nots. This all changed with Cult
manipulated and funded identity politics. The division of opinion
today is betw een W okers and non- W okers and not income brackets.
Cult corporations and their billionaires may hav e taken w ealth
disparity to cataclysmic lev els of injustice, but as long as they speak
the language of W oke, hand out the dosh to the W oke netw ork and
censor the enemy they are ‘one of us’. Billionaires who don’ t giv e a
damn about injustice are laughing at them till their bellies hurt.
W okers are not ev en close to self-aw are enough to see that. The
transformed ‘le ’ dynamic means that W okers who drone on about
‘social justice’ are funded by billionaires that hav e destroy ed social
justice the w orld ov er . It’ s why  they are billionaires.
The climate con
Nothing encapsulates what I hav e said more comprehensiv ely than
the hoax of human-caused global w arming. I hav e detailed in my
books ov er the y ears how Cult operativ es and organisations w ere the
pump-primers from the start of the climate con. A purpose-built
v ehicle for this is the Club of Rome established by the Cult in 1968•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•with the Rockefellers and Rothschilds centrally inv olv ed all along.
Their gofer frontman Maurice Strong, a Canadian oil millionaire,
hosted the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in 1992 where the
global ‘green mov ement’ really expanded in earnest under the
guiding hand of the Cult. The Earth Summit established Agenda 21
through the Cult-created-and-owned United Nations to use the
illusion of human-caused climate change to justify the
transformation of global society to sav e the w orld from climate
disaster . It is a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution sold through
gov ernments, media, schools and univ ersities as whole generations
hav e been terriﬁed into believing that the w orld w as going to end in
their lifetimes unless what old people had inﬂicted upon them w as
stopped by a complete restructuring of how ev erything is done.
Chill, kids, it’ s all a hoax. Such restructuring is precisely what the
Cult agenda demands (purely by coincidence of course). T oday this
has been giv en the codename of the Great Reset which is only an
updated term for Agenda 21 and its associated Agenda 2030. The
la er , too, is administered through the UN and w as v oted into being
by the General Assembly in 2015. Both 21 and 2030 seek centralised
control of all resources and food right down to the raindrops falling
on y our own land. These are some of the demands of Agenda 21
established in 1992. See if y ou recognise this society emerging today:
 
End national sov ereignty
State planning and management of all land resources, ecosystems,
deserts, forests, mountains, oceans and fresh w ater; agriculture;
rural dev elopment; biotechnology; and ensuring ‘equity’
The state to ‘deﬁne the role’ of business and ﬁnancial resources
Abolition of priv ate property
‘Restructuring’ the family unit (see BLM)
Children raised by the state
P eople told what their job will be
Major restrictions on mov ement
Creation of ‘human se lement zones’•
•
•Mass rese lement as people are forced to v acate land where they
liv e
Dumbing down education
Mass global depopulation in pursuit of all the abov e
 
The United Nations w as created as a T rojan horse for w orld
gov ernment. W ith the climate con of critical importance to
promoting that outcome y ou w ould expect the UN to be inv olv ed.
Oh, it’ s inv olv ed all right. The UN is promoting Agenda 21 and
Agenda 2030 justiﬁed by ‘climate change’ while also driving the
climate hoax through its Intergov ernmental P anel on Climate
Change (IPCC), one of the w orld’ s most corrupt organisations. The
IPCC has been lying ferociously and constantly since the day it
opened its doors with the global media hanging unquestioningly on
its ev ery mendacious w ord. The Green mov ement is entirely W oke
and has long lost its original environmental focus since it w as co-
opted by the Cult. An obsession with ‘global w arming’ has deleted
its v alues and scrambled its head. I experienced a small example of
what I mean on a beautiful country w alk that I hav e enjoy ed sev eral
times a w eek for many y ears. The path merged into the ﬁelds and
forests and y ou felt at one with the natural w orld. Then a ‘Green’
organisation, the Hampshire and Isle of W ight W ildlife T rust, took
ov er part of the land and proceeded to cut down a large number of
trees, including mature ones, to install a horrible big, bright steel
‘this-is-ours-stay-out’ fence that destroy ed the whole atmosphere of
this beautiful place. No one with a feel for nature w ould do that. Day
a er day I w alked to the sound of chainsaws and a magniﬁcent
mature w eeping willow tree that I so admired w as cut down at the
base of the trunk. When I challenged a W oke y oung girl in a green
shirt (of course) about this v andalism she replied: ‘It’ s a w eeping
willow – it will grow back.’ This is what people are paying for when
they donate to the Hampshire and Isle of W ight W ildlife T rust and
many other ‘green’ organisations today . It is not the environmental
mov ement that I knew and instead has become a support-system –
as with Extinction Rebellion – for a v ery dark agenda.Private jets for climate justice
The Cult-owned, Gates-funded, W orld Economic Forum and its
founder Klaus Schw ab w ere behind the emergence of Greta
Thunberg to harness the y oung behind the climate agenda and she
w as invited to speak to the w orld at … the UN. Schw ab published a
book, Covid-19: The Great Reset  in 2020 in which he used the ‘Covid’
hoax and the climate hoax to lay out a new society straight out of
Agenda 21 and Agenda 2030. Bill Gates follow ed in early 2021 when
he took time out from destroying the w orld to produce a book in his
name about the w ay to sav e it. Gates ﬂies across the w orld in priv ate
jets and admi ed that ‘I probably hav e one of the highest
greenhouse gas footprints of any one on the planet … my personal
ﬂying alone is gigantic.’ He has also bid for the planet’ s biggest
priv ate jet operator . Other climate change saviours who ﬂy in priv ate
jets include John Kerry , the US Special Presidential Env oy for
Climate, and actor Leonardo DiCaprio, a ‘UN Messenger of P eace
with special focus on climate change’. These people are so full of
bullshit they could corner the market in manure. W e mustn’ t be
sceptical, though, because the Gates book, How to Avoid a Climate
Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We Need , is a
genuine a empt to protect the w orld and not an obvious pile of
excrement a ributed to a mega-psychopath aimed at selling his
masters’ plans for humanity . The Gates book and the other shite-pile
by Klaus Schw ab could hav e been wri en by the same person and
may w ell hav e been. Both use ‘climate change’ and ‘Covid’ as the
excuses for their new society and by coincidence the Cult’ s W orld
Economic Forum and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation promote
the climate hoax and hosted Ev ent 201 which pre-empted with a
‘simulation’ the v ery ‘coronavirus’ hoax that w ould be simulated for
real on humanity within w eeks. The British ‘roy al’ family is
promoting the ‘Reset’ as y ou w ould expect through Prince ‘climate
change caused the w ar in Syria’ Charles and his hapless son Prince
W illiam who said that w e must ‘reset our relationship with nature
and our trajectory as a species’ to av oid a climate disaster . Amazing
how many promotors of the ‘Covid’ and ‘climate change’ controlsystems are connected to Gates and the W orld Economic Forum. A
‘study’ in early 2021 claimed that carbon dioxide emissions must fall
by the equiv alent of a global lockdown roughly ev ery tw o y ears for
the next decade to sav e the planet. The ‘study’ appeared in the same
period that the Schw ab mob claimed in a video that lockdowns
destroying the liv es of billions are good because they make the earth
‘quieter ’ with less ‘ambient noise’. They took down the video amid a
public backlash for such arrogant, empathy-deleted stupidity Y ou
see, how ev er , where they are going with this. Corinne Le Quéré, a
professor at the T yndall Centre for Climate Change Research,
Univ ersity of East Anglia, w as lead author of the climate lockdown
study , and she writes for … the W orld Economic Forum. Gates calls
in ‘his’ book for changing ‘ev ery aspect of the economy’ (long-time
Cult agenda) and for humans to eat synthetic ‘meat’ (predicted in
my books) while cows and other farm animals are eliminated.
Australian TV host and commentator Alan Jones described what
carbon emission targets w ould mean for farm animals in Australia
alone if emissions w ere reduced as demanded by 35 percent by 2030
and zero by 2050:
W e l l ,  l e t ’ s  t a k e  a g r i c u l t u r e ,  t h e  t o t a l  e m i s s i o n s  f r o m  a g r i c u l t u r e  a r e  a b o u t  7 5  m i l l i o n  t o n n e s  o f
c a r b o n  d i o x i d e ,  e q u i v a l e n t .  N o w  r e d u c e  t h a t  b y  3 5  p e r c e n t  a n d  y o u  h a v e  t o  c o m e  d o w n  t o
5 0  m i l l i o n  t o n n e s ,  I ’ v e  d o n e  t h e  m a t h s .  S o  i f  y o u  t a k e  f o r  e x a m p l e  1 . 5  m i l l i o n  c o w s ,  y o u ’ r e
g o i n g  t o  h a v e  t o  r e d u c e  t h e  h e r d  b y  5 2 5 , 0 0 0  [ b y ]  2 0 3 0 ,  n i n e  y e a r s ,  t h a t ’ s  5 8 , 0 0 0  c o w s  a  y e a r .
T h e  b e e f  h e r d ’ s  3 0  m i l l i o n ,  r e d u c e  t h a t  b y  3 5  p e r c e n t ,  t h a t ’ s  1 0 . 5  m i l l i o n ,  w h i c h  m e a n s  1 . 2
m i l l i o n  c a t t l e  h a v e  t o  g o  e v e r y  y e a r  b e t w e e n  n o w  a n d  2 0 3 0 .  T h i s  i s  i n s a n i t y !
T h e r e  a r e  7 5  m i l l i o n  s h e e p .  R e d u c e  t h a t  b y  3 5  p e r c e n t ,  t h a t ’ s  2 6  m i l l i o n  s h e e p ,  t h a t ’ s  a l m o s t  3
m i l l i o n  a  y e a r .  S o  u n d e r  t h e  P a r i s  A g r e e m e n t  o v e r  3 0  m i l l i o n  b e a s t s .  d a i r y  c o w s ,  c a t t l e ,  p i g s
a n d  s h e e p  w o u l d  g o .  M o r e  t h a n  8 , 0 0 0  e v e r y  m i n u t e  o f  e v e r y  h o u r  f o r  t h e  n e x t  d e c a d e ,  d o
t h e s e  p e o p l e  k n o w  w h a t  t h e y ’ r e  t a l k i n g  a b o u t ?
Clearly they don’ t at the lev el of campaigners, politicians and
administrators. The Cult does  know; that’ s the outcome it w ants. W e
are faced with not just a w ar on humanity . Animals and the natural
w orld are being targeted and I hav e been saying since the ‘Covid’
hoax began that the plan ev entually w as to claim that the ‘deadly
virus’ is able to jump from animals, including farm animals anddomestic pets, to humans. Just before this book w ent into production
came this story: ‘Russia registers w orld’ s ﬁrst Covid-19 v accine for
cats & dogs as makers of Sputnik V w arn pets & farm animals could
spread virus’. The report said ‘top scientists w arned that the deadly
pathogen could soon begin spreading through homes and farms’
and ‘the next stage is the infection of farm and domestic animals’.
Know the outcome and y ou’ll see the journey . Think what that
w ould mean for animals and keep y our ey e on a term called
zoonosis or zoonotic diseases which transmit betw een animals and
humans. The Cult w ants to break the connection betw een animals
and people as it does betw een people and people. Farm animals ﬁt
with the Cult agenda to transform food from natural to synthetic.
The gas of life is killing us
There can be few greater examples of Cult inv ersion than the
condemnation of carbon dioxide as a dangerous pollutant when it is
the gas of life. W ithout it the natural w orld w ould be dead and so w e
w ould all be dead. W e breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon
dioxide while plants produce oxygen and absorb carbon dioxide. It
is a perfect symbiotic relationship that the Cult w ants to dismantle
for reasons I will come to in the ﬁnal tw o chapters. Gates, Schw ab,
other Cult operativ es and mindless repeaters, w ant the w orld to be
‘carbon neutral’ by at least 2050 and the earlier the be er . ‘Zero
carbon’ is the cry echoed by lunatics calling for ‘Zero Covid’ when
w e already hav e it. These carbon emission targets will
deindustrialise the w orld in accordance with Cult plans – the post-
industrial, post-democratic society – and with so-called renew ables
like solar and wind not coming ev en close to meeting human energy
needs blackouts and cold are inevitable. T exans got the picture in the
winter of 2021 when a snow storm stopped wind turbines and solar
panels from w orking and the lights w ent down along with w ater
which relies on electricity for its supply system. Gates w ants
ev erything to be pow ered by electricity to ensure that his masters
hav e the kill switch to stop all human activity , mov ement, cooking,
w ater and w armth any time they like. The climate lie is sostupendously inv erted that it claims w e must urgently reduce
carbon dioxide when w e don’t have enough .
Co2 in the atmosphere is a li le abov e 400 parts per million when
the optimum for plant growth is 2,000 ppm and when it falls
anywhere near 150 ppm the natural w orld starts to die and so do w e.
It fell to as low as 280 ppm in an 1880 measurement in Haw aii and
rose to 413 ppm in 2019 with industrialisation which is why the
planet has become greener  in the industrial period. How insane then
that psychopathic madman Gates is not satisﬁed only with blocking
the rise of Co2. He’ s funding technology to suck it out of the
atmosphere. The reason why will become clear . The industrial era is
not destroying the w orld through Co2 and has instead turned
around a potentially disastrous ongoing fall in Co2. Greenpeace co-
founder and scientist P atrick Moore w alked aw ay from Greenpeace
in 1986 and has exposed the green mov ement for fear -mongering
and lies. He said that 500 million y ears ago there w as 17 times  more
Co2 in the atmosphere than w e hav e today and lev els hav e been
falling for hundreds of millions of y ears. In the last 150 million y ears
Co2 lev els in Earth’ s atmosphere had reduced by 90 percent . Moore
said that by the time humanity began to unlock carbon dioxide from
fossil fuels w e w ere at ‘38 seconds to midnight’ and in that sense:
‘Humans are [the Earth’ s] salv ation.’ Moore made the point that only
half the Co2 emi ed by fossil fuels stays in the atmosphere and w e
should remember that all pollution pouring from chimneys that w e
are told is carbon dioxide is in fact nothing of the kind. It’ s pollution.
Carbon dioxide is an invisible gas.
W illiam Happer , Professor of Physics at Princeton Univ ersity and
long-time gov ernment adviser on climate, has emphasised the Co2
deﬁciency for maximum growth and food production. Greenhouse
grow ers don’ t add carbon dioxide for a bit of fun. He said that most
of the w arming in the last 100 y ears, a er the earth emerged from
the super -cold period of the ‘Li le Ice Age’ into a natural w arming
cycle, w as ov er by 1940. Happer said that a peak y ear for w arming in
1988 can be explained by a ‘monster El Nino’ which is a natural and
cyclical w arming of the P aciﬁc that has nothing to do with ‘climatechange’. He said the eﬀect of Co2 could be compared to painting a
w all with red paint in that once tw o or three coats hav e been applied
it didn’ t ma er how much more y ou slapped on because the w all
will not get much redder . Almost all the eﬀect of the rise in Co2 has
already happened, he said, and the v olume in the atmosphere w ould
now hav e to double  to increase temperature by a single degree.
Climate hoaxers know this and they hav e inv ented the most
ridiculously complicated series of ‘feedback’ loops to try to
ov ercome this rather dev astating fact. Y ou hear puppet Greta going
on cluelessly about feedback loops and this is why .
The Sun affects temperature? No you climate denier
Some other nonsense to contemplate: Climate graphs show that rises
in temperature do not follow rises in Co2 – it’s the other way round
with a lag betw een the tw o of some 800 y ears. If w e go back 800
y ears from present time w e hit the Mediev al W arm P eriod when
temperatures w ere higher than now without any industrialisation
and this w as follow ed by the Li le Ice Age when temperatures
plummeted. The w orld w as still emerging from these centuries of
serious cold when many climate records began which makes the
ev er -repeated line of the ‘ho est y ear since records began’
meaningless when y ou are not comparing like with like. The coldest
period of the Li le Ice Age corresponded with the low est period of
sunspot activity when the Sun w as at its least activ e. Proper
scientists will not be at all surprised by this when it conﬁrms the
obvious fact that earth temperature is aﬀected by the scale of Sun
activity and the energetic pow er that it subsequently emits; but
when is the last time y ou heard a climate hoaxer talking about the
Sun as a source of earth temperature?? Ev erything has to be focussed
on Co2 which makes up just 0.117 percent of so-called greenhouse
gases and only a fraction of ev en that is generated by human activity .
The rest is natural. More than 90 percent  of those greenhouse gases
are w ater v apour and clouds ( Fig 9 ). Ban moisture I say . Hav e y ou
noticed that the climate hoaxers no longer use the polar bear as their
promotion image? That’ s because far from becoming extinct polarbear communities are stable or thriving. Joe Bastardi, American
meteorologist, w eather forecaster and outspoken critic of the climate
lie, documents in his book The Climate Chronicles  how w eather
pa erns and ev ents claimed to be evidence of climate change hav e
been happening since long before industrialisation: ‘What happened
before naturally is happening again, as is to be expected giv en the
cyclical nature of the climate due to the design of the planet.’ If y ou
read the detailed background to the climate hoax in my other books
y ou will shake y our head and w onder how any one could believ e the
crap which has spawned a multi-trillion dollar industry based on
absolute garbage (see HIV causes AIDs and Sars-Cov-2 causes
‘Covid-19’). Climate and ‘Covid’ hav e much in common giv en they
hav e the same source. They both hav e the contradictory everything
factor in which ev erything is explained by reference to them. It’ s hot
– ‘it’ s climate change’. It’ s cold – ‘it’ s climate change’. I got a sniﬄe –
‘it’ s Covid’. I hav en’ t got a sniﬄe – ‘it’ s Covid’. Not having a sniﬄe
has to be a symptom of ‘Covid’. Ev erything is and not having a
sniﬄe is especially dangerous if y ou are a slow w alker . For sheer
audacity I oﬀer y ou a Cambridge Univ ersity ‘study’ that actually
linked ‘Covid’ to ‘climate change’. It had to happen ev entually . They
concluded that climate change play ed a role in ‘Covid-19’ spreading
from animals to humans because … w ait for it … I kid y ou not … the
two groups were forced closer together as populations grow . Er , that’ s it.
The whole foundation on which this depended w as that ‘Bats are the
likely zoonotic origin of SARS-CoV -1 and SARS-CoV -2’. W ell, they
are not. They are nothing to do with it. Apart from bats not being the
origin and therefore ‘climate change’ eﬀects on bats being irrelev ant
I am in aw e of their academic insight. Where w ould w e be without
them? Not where w e are that’ s for sure.Figure 9:  T h e  i d e a  t h a t  t h e  g a s  o f  l i f e  i s  d i s a s t r o u s l y  c h a n g i n g  t h e  c l i m a t e  i s  a n  i n s u l t  t o  b r a i n
c e l l  a c t i v i t y .
One other point about the w eather is that climate modiﬁcation is
now w ell adv anced and not ev ery major w eather ev ent is natural –
or earthquake come to that. I cov er this subject at some length in
other books. China is openly planning a rapid expansion of its
w eather modiﬁcation programme which includes changing the
climate in an area more than one and a half times the size of India.
China used w eather manipulation to ensure clear skies during the
2008 Olympics in Beĳing. I hav e quoted from US military documents
detailing how to employ w eather manipulation as a w eapon of w ar
and they did that in the 1960s and 70s during the conﬂict in V ietnam
with Operation P opey e manipulating monsoon rains for military
purposes. Why w ould there be international treaties on w eather
modiﬁcation if it w asn’ t possible? Of course it is. W eather is
energetic information and it can be changed.
How was the climate hoax pulled off? See ‘Covid’
If y ou can get billions to believ e in a ‘virus’ that doesn’ t exist y ou can
get them to believ e in human-caused climate change that doesn’ t
exist. Both are being used by the Cult to transform global society in
the w ay it has long planned. Both hoaxes hav e been achiev ed in
pre y much the same w ay . First y ou declare a lie is a fact. There’ s a‘virus’ y ou call SARS-Cov-2 or humans are w arming the planet with
their behaviour . Next this becomes, via Cult netw orks, the
foundation of gov ernment, academic and science policy and belief.
Those who parrot the mantra are giv en big grants to produce
research that conﬁrms the narrativ e is true and ev er more
‘symptoms’ are added to make the ‘virus’/’climate change’ sound
ev en more scary . Scientists and researchers who challenge the
narrativ e hav e their grants withdrawn and their careers destroy ed.
The media promote the lie as the unquestionable truth and censor
those with an alternativ e view or evidence. A great percentage of the
population believ e what they are told as the lie becomes an
ev erybody-knows-that and the believing-masses turn on those with
a mind of their own. The technique has been used endlessly
throughout human history . W okers are the biggest promotors of the
climate lie and  ‘Covid’ fascism because their minds are owned by the
Cult; their sense of self-righteous self-purity knows no bounds; and
they exist in a bubble of reality in which facts are irrelev ant and only
get in the w ay of looking without seeing.
Running through all of this like v eins in a blue cheese is control of
information, which means control of perception, which means
control of behaviour , which collectiv ely means control of human
society . The Cult owns the global media and Silicon V alley fascists
for the simple reason that it has  to. W ithout control of information it
can’ t control perception and through that human society . Examine
ev ery facet of the Cult agenda and y ou will see that anything
supporting its introduction is nev er censored while anything
pushing back is alw ays censored. I say again: Psychopaths that know
why they are doing this must go before Nuremberg trials and those
that follow their orders must trot along behind them into the same
dock. ‘I w as just following orders’ didn’ t w ork the ﬁrst time and it
must not w ork now . Nuremberg trials must be held all ov er the
w orld before public juries for politicians, gov ernment oﬃcials,
police, compliant doctors, scientists and virologists, and all Cult
operativ es such as Gates, T edros, Fauci, V allance, Whi y , Ferguson,
Zuckerberg, W ojcicki, Brin, P age, Dorsey , the whole damn lot ofthem – including, no especially , the psychopath psychologists.
W ithout them and the brainless, gutless excuses for journalists that
hav e repeated their lies, none of this could be happening. Nobody
can be allow ed to escape justice for the psychological and economic
Armageddon they are all responsible for visiting upon the human
race.
As for the compliant, unquestioning, sw athes of humanity , and the
self-obsessed, all-knowing ignorance of the W okers … don’ t start me.
God help their kids. God help their grandkids. God help them .ICHAPTER NINE
We must have it? So what is it?
Well I won’t back down. No, I won’t back down. Y ou can stand me
up at the Gates of Hell. But I won’t back down
Tom Petty
will now focus on the genetically-manipulating ‘Covid v accines’
which do not meet this oﬃcial deﬁnition of a v accine by the US
Centers for Disease Control (CDC): ‘ A product that stimulates a
person’ s immune system to produce immunity to a speciﬁc disease,
protecting the person from that disease.’ On that basis ‘Covid
v accines’ are not a v accine in that the makers don’ t ev en claim they
stop infection or transmission.
They are instead part of a multi-lev elled conspiracy to change the
nature of the human body and what it means to be ‘human’ and to
depopulate an enormous sw athe of humanity . What I shall call
Human 1.0 is on the cusp of becoming Human 2.0 and for v ery
sinister reasons. Before I get to the ‘Covid v accine’ in detail here’ s
some background to v accines in general. Gov ernment regulators do
not test v accines – the makers do – and the makers control which
data is rev ealed and which isn’ t. Children in America are giv en 50
v accine doses by age six and 69 by age 19 and the eﬀect of the whole
combined schedule has nev er been tested. Autoimmune diseases
when the immune system a acks its own body hav e soared in the
mass v accine era and so has disease in general in children and the
y oung. Why w ouldn’ t this be the case when v accines target the
immune system?  The US gov ernment gav e Big Pharma drugcompanies immunity from prosecution for v accine death and injury
in the 1986 National Childhood V accine Injury Act (NCVIA) and
since then the gov ernment (taxpay er) has been funding
compensation for the consequences of Big Pharma v accines. The
criminal and satanic drug giants can’ t lose and the v accine schedule
has increased dramatically since 1986 for this reason. There is no
incentiv e to make v accines safe and a big incentiv e to make money
by introducing ev er more. Ev en against a ridiculously high bar to
prov e v accine liability , and with the gov ernment controlling the
hearing in which it is being challenged for compensation, the v accine
court has so far paid out more than $4 billion. These are the v accines
w e are told are safe and psychopaths like Zuckerberg censor posts
saying otherwise. The immunity law w as ev en justiﬁed by a ruling
that v accines by their nature w ere ‘unav oidably unsafe’.
Check out the ingredients of v accines and y ou will be shocked if
y ou are new to this. They put that in children’s bodies?? What??  T ry
aluminium, a brain toxin connected to dementia, aborted foetal
tissue and formaldehyde which is used to embalm corpses. W orld-
renowned aluminium expert Christopher Exley had his research into
the health eﬀect of aluminium in v accines shut down by Keele
Univ ersity in the UK when it began taking funding from the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation. Research when diseases ‘eradicated’ by
v accines began to decline and y ou will ﬁnd the fall began long before
the v accine w as introduced. Sometimes the fall ev en plateaued a er
the v accine. Diseases like scarlet fev er for which there w as no
v accine declined in the same w ay because of environmental and
other factors. A perfect case in point is the polio v accine. P olio began
when lead arsenate w as ﬁrst spray ed as an insecticide and residues
remained in food products. Spraying started in 1892 and the ﬁrst US
polio epidemic came in V ermont in 1894. The simple answ er w as to
stop spraying, but Rockefeller -created Big Pharma had a be er idea.
P olio w as decreed to be caused by the poliovirus  which ‘spreads from
person to person and can infect a person’ s spinal cord’. Lead
arsenate w as replaced by the lethal DDT which had the same eﬀect
of causing paralysis by damaging the brain and central nerv oussystem. P olio plummeted when DDT w as reduced and then banned,
but the v accine is still giv en the credit for something it didn’ t do.
T oday by far the biggest cause of polio is the v accines promoted by
Bill Gates. V accine justice campaigner Robert Kennedy Jr , son of
assassinated (by the Cult) US A orney General Robert Kennedy ,
wrote:
I n  2 0 1 7 ,  t h e  W o r l d  H e a l t h  O r g a n i z a t i o n  ( W H O )  r e l u c t a n t l y  a d m i t t e d  t h a t  t h e  g l o b a l  e x p l o s i o n
i n  p o l i o  i s  p r e d o m i n a n t l y  v a c c i n e  s t r a i n .  T h e  m o s t  f r i g h t e n i n g  e p i d e m i c s  i n  C o n g o ,
A f g h a n i s t a n ,  a n d  t h e  P h i l i p p i n e s ,  a r e  a l l  l i n k e d  t o  v a c c i n e s .  I n  f a c t ,  b y  2 0 1 8 ,  7 0 %  o f  g l o b a l
p o l i o  c a s e s  w e r e  v a c c i n e  s t r a i n .
V accines make fortunes for Cult-owned Gates and Big Pharma
while undermining the health and immune systems of the
population. W e had a glimpse of the mentality behind the Big
Pharma cartel with a report on WION (W orld is One News), an
international English language TV station based in India, which
exposed the extraordinary behaviour of US drug company Pﬁzer
ov er its ‘Covid v accine’. The WION report told how Pﬁzer had made
fantastic demands of Argentina, Brazil and other countries in return
for its ‘v accine’. These included immunity from prosecution, ev en
for Pﬁzer negligence, gov ernment insurance to protect Pﬁzer from
law suits and handing ov er as collateral sov ereign assets of the
country to include Argentina’ s bank reserv es, military bases and
embassy buildings. Pﬁzer demanded the same of Brazil in the form
of w aiving sov ereignty of its assets abroad; exempting Pﬁzer from
Brazilian laws; and giving Pﬁzer immunity from all civil liability .
This is a ‘v accine’ dev eloped with gov ernment funding. Big Pharma
is evil incarnate as a creation of the Cult and all must be handed
tickets to Nuremberg.
Phantom ‘vaccine’ for a phantom ‘disease’
I’ll expose the ‘Covid v accine’ fraud and then go on to the wider
background of why the Cult has set out to ‘v accinate’ ev ery man,
w oman and child on the planet for an alleged ‘new disease’ with a
surviv al rate of 99.77 percent (or more) ev en by the grotesquely-manipulated ﬁgures of the W orld Health Organization and Johns
Hopkins Univ ersity . The ‘infection’ to ‘death’ ratio is 0.23 to 0.15
percent according to Stanford epidemiologist Dr John Ioannidis and
while estimates v ary the danger remains tiny . I say that if the truth
be told the fake infection to fake death ratio is zero. Nev er mind all
the evidence I hav e presented here and in The Answer  that there is no
‘virus’ let us just focus for a moment on that death-rate ﬁgure of say
0.23 percent. The ﬁgure includes all those w orldwide who hav e
tested positiv e with a test not testing for the ‘virus’ and then died
within 28 days or ev en longer of any other cause – any other cause .
Now subtract all those illusory ‘Covid’ deaths on the global data
sheets from the 0.23 percent. What do y ou think y ou w ould be le 
with? Zero . A v accination has nev er been successfully dev eloped for
a so-called coronavirus. They hav e all failed at the animal testing
stage when they caused hypersensitivity to what they w ere claiming
to protect against and made the impact of a disease far w orse. Cult-
owned v accine corporations got around that problem this time by
bypassing animal trials, going straight to humans and making the
length of the ‘trials’ before the public rollout as short as they could
get aw ay with. Normally it takes ﬁv e to ten y ears or more to dev elop
v accines that still cause demonstrable harm to many people and
that’ s without including the long-term eﬀects that are nev er oﬃcially
connected to the v accination. ‘Covid’ non-v accines hav e been
oﬃcially produced and approv ed in a ma er of months from a
standing start and part of the reason is that (a) they w ere dev eloped
before the ‘Covid’ hoax began and (b) they are based on computer
programs and not natural sources. Oﬃcial non-trials w ere so short
that gov ernment agencies gav e emergency,  not full, approv al. ‘T rials’
w ere not ev en completed and full approv al cannot be secured until
they are. Public ‘Covid v accination’ is actually a continuation of the
trial . Drug company ‘trials’ are not scheduled to end until 2023 by
which time a lot of people are going to be dead. Data on which
gov ernment agencies gav e this emergency approv al w as supplied by
the Big Pharma corporations themselv es in the form of
Pﬁzer/BioNT ech, AstraZeneca, Moderna, Johnson & Johnson, andothers, and this is the case with all v accines. By its v ery nature
emergency  approv al means drug companies do not hav e to prov e that
the ‘v accine’ is ‘safe and eﬀectiv e’. How could they with trials w ay
short of complete? Gov ernment regulators only hav e to believe  that
they could  be safe and eﬀectiv e. It is criminal manipulation to get
products in circulation with no testing w orth the name. Agencies
giving that approv al are infested with Big Pharma-connected place-
people and they act in the interests of Big Pharma (the Cult) and not
the public about whom they do not giv e a damn.
More human lab rats
‘Covid v accines’ produced in record time by Pﬁzer/BioNT ech and
Moderna employ a technique never approved before for use on humans .
They are known as mRNA ‘v accines’ and inject a synthetic v ersion of
‘viral’ mRNA or ‘messenger RNA ’. The key is in the term
‘messenger ’. The body w orks, or doesn’ t, on the basis of information
messaging. Communications are constantly passing betw een and
within the genetic system and the brain. Change those messages and
y ou change the state of the body and ev en its v ery nature and y ou
can change psychology and behaviour by the w ay the brain
processes information. I think y ou are going to see signiﬁcant
changes in personality and perception of many people who hav e had
the ‘Covid v accine’ synthetic potions. Insider Aldous Huxley
predicted the following in 1961 and mRNA ‘v accines’ can be
included in the term ‘pharmacological methods’:
T h e r e  w i l l  b e ,  i n  t h e  n e x t  g e n e r a t i o n  o r  s o ,  a  p h a r m a c o l o g i c a l  m e t h o d  o f  m a k i n g  p e o p l e  l o v e
t h e i r  s e r v i t u d e ,  a n d  p r o d u c i n g  d i c t a t o r s h i p  w i t h o u t  t e a r s ,  s o  t o  s p e a k ,  p r o d u c i n g  a  k i n d  o f
p a i n l e s s  c o n c e n t r a t i o n  c a m p  f o r  e n t i r e  s o c i e t i e s ,  s o  t h a t  p e o p l e  w i l l  i n  f a c t  h a v e  t h e i r  o w n
l i b e r t i e s  t a k e n  a w a y  f r o m  t h e m ,  b u t  r a t h e r  e n j o y  i t ,  b e c a u s e  t h e y  w i l l  b e  d i s t r a c t e d  f r o m  a n y
d e s i r e  t o  r e b e l  b y  p r o p a g a n d a  o r  b r a i n w a s h i n g ,  o r  b r a i n w a s h i n g  e n h a n c e d  b y
p h a r m a c o l o g i c a l  m e t h o d s .  A n d  t h i s  s e e m s  t o  b e  t h e  f i n a l  r e v o l u t i o n .
Apologists claim that mRNA synthetic ‘v accines’ don’ t change the
DNA genetic blueprint because RNA does not aﬀect DNA only the
other w ay round. This is so disingenuous. A process called ‘rev ersetranscription’ can conv ert RNA into DNA and be integrated into
DNA in the cell nucleus. This w as highlighted in December , 2020, by
scientists at Harv ard and Massachuse s Institute of T echnology
(MIT). Geneticists report that more than 40 percent of mammalian
genomes results from rev erse transcription. On the most basic lev el
if messaging changes then that sequence must lead to changes in
DNA which is receiving and transmi ing those communications.
How can introducing synthetic material into cells not change the
cells where DNA is located? The process is known as transfection
which is deﬁned as ‘a technique to insert foreign nucleic acid (DNA
or RNA) into a cell, typically with the intention of altering the
properties of the cell’. Researchers at the Sloan Ke ering Institute in
New Y ork found that changes in messenger RNA can deactiv ate
tumour -suppressing proteins and thereby promote cancer . This is
what happens when y ou mess with messaging. ‘Covid v accine’
maker Moderna w as founded in 2010 by Canadian stem cell
biologist Derrick J. Rossi a er his breakthrough discov ery in the ﬁeld
of transforming and reprogramming stem cells. These are neutral
cells that can be programmed to become any cell including sperm
cells. Moderna w as therefore founded on the principle of genetic
manipulation and has nev er produced any v accine or drug before its
genetically-manipulating synthetic ‘Covid’ shite. Look at the name –
Mode-RNA or Modify-RNA. Another important point is that the US
Supreme Court has ruled that genetically-modiﬁed DNA, or
complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesized in the laboratory from
messenger RNA, can be patented and owned. These psychopaths are
doing this to the human body .
Cells replicate synthetic mRNA in the ‘Covid v accines’ and in
theory the body is tricked into making antigens which trigger
antibodies to target the ‘virus spike proteins’ which as Dr T om
Cow an said hav e never been seen . Cut the crap and these ‘v accines’
deliv er self-replicating  synthetic material to the cells with the eﬀect of
changing human DNA. The more of them y ou hav e the more that
process is compounded while synthetic material is all the time self-
replicating. ‘V accine’-maker Moderna describes mRNA as ‘likeso w are for the cell’ and so they are messing with the body’ s
so w are. What happens when y ou change the so w are in a
computer? Ev erything changes. For this reason the Cult is preparing
a production line of mRNA ‘Covid v accines’ and a long list of
excuses to use them as with all the ‘v ariants’ of a ‘virus’ nev er shown
to exist. The plan is further to transfer the mRNA technique to other
v accines mostly giv en to children and y oung people. The cumulativ e
consequences will be a transformation of human DNA through a
constant infusion of synthetic genetic material which will kill many
and change the rest. Now consider that gov ernments that hav e giv en
emergency approv al for a v accine that’ s not a v accine; nev er been
approv ed for humans before; had no testing w orth the name; and
the makers hav e been giv en immunity from prosecution for any
deaths or adv erse eﬀects suﬀered by the public. The UK gov ernment
aw arded permanent legal indemnity  to itself and its employ ees for
harm done when a patient is being treated for ‘Covid-19’ or
‘suspected Covid-19’. That is quite a thought when these are possible
‘side-eﬀects’ from the ‘v accine’ (they are not ‘side’, they are eﬀects)
listed by the US Food and Drug Administration:
Guillain-Barre syndrome; acute disseminated encephalomy elitis;
transv erse my elitis; encephalitis; my elitis; encephalomy elitis;
meningoencephalitis; meningitis; encephalopathy; convulsions;
seizures; stroke; narcolepsy; cataplexy; anaphylaxis; acute
my ocardial infarction (heart a ack); my ocarditis; pericarditis;
autoimmune disease; death; implications for pregnancy , and birth
outcomes; other acute demy elinating diseases; non anaphylactic
allergy reactions; thrombocytopenia ; disseminated intrav ascular
coagulation; v enous thromboembolism; arthritis; arthralgia; joint
pain; Kaw asaki disease; multisystem inﬂammatory syndrome in
children; v accine enhanced disease. The la er is the w ay the
‘v accine’ has the potential to make diseases far w orse than they
w ould otherwise be.UK doctor and freedom campaigner V ernon Coleman described
the conditions in this list as ‘all unpleasant, most of them v ery
serious, and y ou can’ t get more serious than death’. The thought that
any one at all has had the ‘v accine’ in these circumstances is
testament to the potential that humanity has for clueless,
unquestioning, stupidity and for many that programmed stupidity
has already been terminal.
An insider speaks
Dr Michael Y eadon is a former V ice President, head of research and
Chief Scientiﬁc Adviser at v accine giant Pﬁzer . Y eadon w orked on
the inside of Big Pharma, but that did not stop him becoming a v ocal
critic of ‘Covid v accines’ and their potential for multiple harms,
including infertility in w omen. By the spring of 2021 he w ent much
further and ev en used the no, no, term ‘conspiracy’. When y ou begin
to see what is going on it is impossible not to do so. Y eadon spoke
out in an interview with freedom campaigner James Delingpole and
I mentioned earlier how he said that no one had samples of ‘the
virus’. He explained that the mRNA technique originated in the anti-
cancer ﬁeld and w ays to turn on and oﬀ certain genes which could
be adv antageous if y ou w anted to stop cancer growing out of
control. ‘That’ s the origin of them. They are a v ery unusual
application, really .’ Y eadon said that treating a cancer patient with
an aggressiv e procedure might be understandable if the alternativ e
w as dying, but it w as quite another thing to use the same technique
as a public health measure. Most people inv olv ed w ouldn’ t catch the
infectious agent y ou w ere v accinating against and if they did they
probably w ouldn’ t die:
I f  y o u  a r e  r e a l l y  u s i n g  i t  a s  a  p u b l i c  h e a l t h  m e a s u r e  y o u  r e a l l y  w a n t  t o  a s  c l o s e  a s  y o u  c a n  g e t
t o  z e r o  s i d e s - e f f e c t s  …  I  f i n d  i t  o d d  t h a t  t h e y  c h o s e  t e c h n i q u e s  t h a t  w e r e  r e a l l y  c u t t i n g  t h e i r
t e e t h  i n  t h e  f i e l d  o f  o n c o l o g y  a n d  I ’ m  w o r r i e d  t h a t  i n  u s i n g  g e n e - b a s e d  v a c c i n e s  t h a t  h a v e  t o
b e  i n j e c t e d  i n  t h e  b o d y  a n d  s p r e a d  a r o u n d  t h e  b o d y ,  g e t  t a k e n  u p  i n t o  s o m e  c e l l s ,  a n d  t h e
r e g u l a t o r s  h a v e n ’ t  q u i t e  t o l d  u s  w h i c h  c e l l s  t h e y  g e t  t a k e n  u p  i n t o  …  y o u  a r e  g o i n g  t o  b e
g e n e r a t i n g  a  w i d e  r a n g e  o f  r e s p o n s e s  …  w i t h  m u l t i p l e  s t e p s  e a c h  o f  w h i c h  c o u l d  g o  w e l l  o r
b a d l y .I doubt the Cult intends it to go w ell. Y eadon said that y ou can put
any gene y ou like into the body through the ‘v accine’. ‘Y ou can
certainly giv e them a gene that w ould do them some harm if y ou
w anted.’ I w as intrigued when he said that when used in the cancer
ﬁeld the technique could turn genes on and oﬀ. I explore this process
in The Answer  and with diﬀerent genes having diﬀerent functions
y ou could create mayhem – physically and psychologically – if y ou
turned the wrong ones on and the right ones oﬀ. I read reports of an
experiment by researchers at the Univ ersity of W ashington’ s school
of computer science and engineering in which they encoded DNA to
infect computers. The body is itself a biological computer and if
human DNA can inﬂict damage on a computer why can’ t the
computer via synthetic material mess with the human body? It can.
The W ashington research team said it w as possible to insert
malicious malw are into ‘physical DNA strands’ and corrupt the
computer system of a gene sequencing machine as it ‘reads gene
le ers and stores them as binary digits 0 and 1’. They concluded that
hackers could one day use blood or spit samples to access computer
systems and obtain sensitiv e data from police forensics labs or infect
genome ﬁles. It is at this lev el of digital interaction that synthetic
‘v accines’ need to be seen to get the full picture and that will become
v ery clear later on. Michael Y eadon said it made no sense to giv e the
‘v accine’ to y ounger people who w ere in no danger from the ‘virus’.
What w as the beneﬁt? It w as all downside with potential eﬀects:
T h e  f a c t  t h a t  m y  g o v e r n m e n t  i n  w h a t  I  t h o u g h t  w a s  a  c i v i l i s e d ,  r a t i o n a l  c o u n t r y ,  i s  r a i n i n g  [ t h e
‘ v a c c i n e ’ ]  o n  p e o p l e  i n  t h e i r  3 0 s  a n d  4 0 s ,  e v e n  m y  c h i l d r e n  i n  t h e i r  2 0 s ,  t h e y ’ r e  g e t t i n g  l e t t e r s
a n d  p h o n e  c a l l s ,  I  k n o w  t h i s  i s  n o t  r i g h t  a n d  a n y  o f  y o u  d o c t o r s  w h o  a r e  v a c c i n a t i n g  y o u
k n o w  i t ’ s  n o t  r i g h t ,  t o o .  T h e y  a r e  n o t  a t  r i s k .  T h e y  a r e  n o t  a t  r i s k  f r o m  t h e  d i s e a s e ,  s o  y o u  a r e
n o w  h o p i n g  t h a t  t h e  s i d e - e f f e c t s  a r e  s o  r a r e  t h a t  y o u  g e t  a w a y  w i t h  i t .  Y o u  d o n ’ t  g i v e  n e w
t e c h n o l o g y  …  t h a t  y o u  d o n ’ t  u n d e r s t a n d  t o  1 0 0  p e r c e n t  o f  t h e  p o p u l a t i o n .
Blood clot problems with the AstraZeneca ‘v accine’ hav e been
aﬀecting y ounger people to emphasise the downside risks with no
beneﬁt. AstraZeneca’ s v ersion, produced with Oxford Univ ersity ,
does not use mRNA, but still gets its toxic cocktail inside cells whereit targets DNA. The Johnson & Johnson ‘v accine’ which uses a
similar technique has also produced blood clot eﬀects to such an
extent that the United States paused its use at one point. They are all
‘gene therapy’ (cell modiﬁcation) procedures and not ‘v accines’. The
truth is that once the content of these injections enter cells w e hav e
no idea what the eﬀect will be. P eople can speculate and some can
giv e v ery educated opinions and that’ s good. In the end, though,
only the makers know what their potions are designed to do and
ev en they w on’ t know ev ery last consequence. Michael Y eadon w as
scathing about doctors doing what they knew to be wrong.
‘Ev ery one’ s mute’, he said. Doctors in the NHS must know this w as
not right, coming into w ork and injecting people. ‘I don’ t know how
they sleep at night. I know I couldn’ t do it. I know that if I w ere in
that position I’ d hav e to quit.’ He said he knew enough about
toxicology to know this w as not a good risk-beneﬁt. Y eadon had
spoken to sev en or eight univ ersity professors and all except tw o
w ould not speak out publicly . Their univ ersities had a policy that no
one said anything that countered the gov ernment and its medical
advisors. They w ere afraid of losing their gov ernment grants. This is
how intimidation has been used to silence the truth at ev ery lev el of
the system. I say silence, but these people could still speak out if they
made that choice. Y eadon called them ‘moral cow ards’ – ‘This is
about y our children and grandchildren’ s liv es and y ou hav e just
buggered oﬀ and le  it.’
‘Variant’ nonsense
Some of his most pow erful comments related to the alleged
‘v ariants’ being used to instil more fear , justify more lockdowns, and
introduce more ‘v accines’. He said gov ernment claims about
‘v ariants’ w ere nonsense. He had checked the alleged v ariant ‘codes’
and they w ere 99.7 percent identical to the ‘original’. This w as the
human identity diﬀerence equiv alent to pu ing a baseball cap on
and oﬀ or w earing it the other w ay round. A 0.3 percent diﬀerence
w ould make it impossible for that ‘v ariant’ to escape immunity from
the ‘original’. This made no sense of having new ‘v accines’ for‘v ariants’. He said there w ould hav e to be at least a 30 percent
diﬀerence for that to be justiﬁed and ev en then he believ ed the
immune system w ould still recognise what it w as. Gates-funded
‘v ariant modeller ’ and ‘v accine’-pusher John Edmunds might care to
comment. Y eadon said drug companies w ere making new v ersions
of the ‘v accine’ as a ‘top up’ for ‘v ariants’. W orse than that, he said,
the ‘regulators’ around the w orld like the MHRA in the UK had got
together and agreed that because ‘v accines’ for ‘v ariants’ w ere so
similar to the ﬁrst ‘v accines’ they did not have to do safety studies . How
transparently sinister that is. This is when Y eadon said: ‘There is a
conspiracy here.’ There w as no need for another v accine for
‘v ariants’ and y et w e w ere told that there w as and the country had
shut its borders because of them. ‘They are going into hundreds of
millions of arms without passing ‘go’ or any regulator . Why did they
do that? Why did they pick this method of making the v accine?’
The reason had to be something bigger than that it seemed and
‘it’ s not protection against the virus’. It’ s w as a far bigger project that
meant politicians and advisers w ere willing to do things and not do
things that knowingly resulted in av oidable deaths – ‘that’ s already
happened when y ou think about lockdown and depriv ation of
health care for a y ear .’ He spoke of people prepared to do something
that results in the av oidable death of their fellow human beings and
it not bother them. This is the penny-drop I hav e been w orking to
get across for more than 30 y ears – the lev el of pure evil w e are
dealing with. Y eadon said his friends and associates could not
believ e there could be that much evil, but he reminded them of
Stalin, P ol P ot and Hitler and of what Stalin had said: ‘One death is a
tragedy . A million? A statistic.’ He could not think of a benign
explanation for why y ou need top-up v accines ‘which I’ m sure y ou
don’ t’ and for the regulators ‘to just get out of the w ay and w av e
them through’. Why w ould the regulators do that when they w ere
still wrestling with the dangers of the ‘parent’ v accine? He w as
clearly shocked by what he had seen since the ‘Covid’ hoax began
and now he w as thinking the previously unthinkable:I f  y o u  w a n t e d  t o  d e p o p u l a t e  a  s i g n i f i c a n t  p r o p o r t i o n  o f  t h e  w o r l d  a n d  t o  d o  i t  i n  a  w a y  t h a t
d o e s n ’ t  i n v o l v e  d e s t r u c t i o n  o f  t h e  e n v i r o n m e n t  w i t h  n u c l e a r  w e a p o n s ,  p o i s o n i n g  e v e r y o n e
w i t h  a n t h r a x  o r  s o m e t h i n g  l i k e  t h a t ,  a n d  y o u  w a n t e d  p l a u s i b l e  d e n i a b i l i t y  w h i l e  y o u  h a d  a
m u l t i - y e a r  i n f e c t i o u s  d i s e a s e  c r i s i s ,  I  a c t u a l l y  d o n ’ t  t h i n k  y o u  c o u l d  c o m e  u p  w i t h  a  b e t t e r  p l a n
o f  w o r k  t h a n  s e e m s  t o  b e  i n  f r o n t  o f  m e .  I  c a n ’ t  s a y  t h a t ’ s  w h a t  t h e y  a r e  g o i n g  t o  d o ,  b u t  I  c a n ’ t
t h i n k  o f  a  b e n i g n  e x p l a n a t i o n  w h y  t h e y  a r e  d o i n g  i t .
He said he nev er thought that they w ould get rid of 99 percent of
humans, but now he w ondered. ‘If y ou w anted to that this w ould be
a hell of a w ay to do it – it w ould be unstoppable folks.’ Y eadon had
concluded that those who submi ed to the ‘v accine’ w ould be
allow ed to hav e some kind of normal life (but for how long?) while
screws w ere tightened to coerce and mandate the last few percent. ‘I
think they’ll put the rest of them in a prison camp. I wish I w as
wrong, but I don’ t think I am.’ Other points he made included: There
w ere no coronavirus v accines then suddenly they all come along at
the same time; w e hav e no idea of the long term aﬀect with trials so
short; coercing or forcing people to hav e medical procedures is
against the Nuremberg Code instigated when the Nazis did just that;
people should at least delay having the ‘v accine’; a quick Internet
search conﬁrms that masks don’ t reduce respiratory viral
transmission and ‘the gov ernment knows that’; they hav e smashed
civil society and they know that, too; tw o dozen peer -review ed
studies show no connection betw een lockdown and reducing deaths;
he knew from personal friends the elite w ere still ﬂying around and
going on holiday while the public w ere locked down; the elite w ere
not having the ‘v accines’. He w as also asked if ‘v accines’ could be
made to target diﬀerence races. He said he didn’ t know , but the
document by the Project for the New American Century in
September , 2000, said dev eloping ‘adv anced forms of biological
w arfare that can target specific genotypes  may transform biological
w arfare from the realm of terror to a politically useful tool.’ Oh,
they’ re evil all right. Of that w e can be absolutely  sure.
Another cull of old peopleW e hav e seen from the CDC deﬁnition that the mRNA ‘Covid
v accine’ is not a v accine and nor are the others that claim  to reduce
‘sev erity of symptoms’ in some  people, but not protect from infection
or transmission. What about all the lies about returning to ‘normal’ if
people w ere ‘v accinated’? If they are not claimed to stop infection
and transmission of the alleged ‘virus’, how does anything change?
This w as all lies to manipulate people to take the jabs and w e are
seeing that now with masks and distancing still required for the
‘v accinated’. How did they think that elderly people with fragile
health and immune responses w ere going to be aﬀected by infusing
their cells with synthetic material and other toxic substances? They
knew  that in the short and long term it w ould be dev astating and
fatal as the culling of the old that began with the ﬁrst lockdowns w as
continued with the ‘v accine’. Death rates in care homes soared
immediately residents began to be ‘v accinated’ – infused with
synthetic material. Brav e and commi ed whistleblow er nurses put
their careers at risk by exposing this truth while the rest kept their
heads down and their mouths shut to put their careers before those
they are supposed to care for . A long-time American Certiﬁed
Nursing Assistant who gav e his name as James posted a video in
which he described emotionally what happened in his care home
when v accination began. He said that during 2020 v ery few residents
w ere sick with ‘Covid’ and no one died during the entire y ear; but
shortly a er the Pﬁzer mRNA injections 14 people died within tw o
w eeks and many others w ere near death. ‘They’ re dropping like
ﬂies’, he said. Residents who w alked on their own before the shot
could no longer and they had lost their ability to conduct an
intelligent conv ersation. The home’ s management said the sudden
deaths w ere caused by a ‘super -spreader ’ of ‘Covid-19’. Then how
come, James asked, that residents who refused to take the injections
w ere not sick? It w as a case of inject the elderly with mRNA
synthetic potions and blame their illness and death that follow ed on
the ‘virus’. James described what w as happening in care homes as
‘the greatest crime of genocide this country has ev er seen’.
Remember the NHS staﬀ nurse from earlier who used the samew ord ‘genocide’ for what w as happening with the ‘v accines’ and
that it w as an ‘act of human annihilation’. A UK care home
whistleblow er told a similar story to James about the eﬀect of the
‘v accine’ in deaths and ‘outbreaks’ of illness dubbed ‘Covid’ a er
ge ing the jab. She told how her care home management and staﬀ
had zealously imposed gov ernment regulations and no one w as
allow ed to ev en question the oﬃcial narrativ e let alone speak out
against it. She said the NHS w as ev en w orse. Again w e see the
results of reframing. A w orker at a local care home where I liv e said
they had not had a single case of ‘Covid’ there for almost a y ear and
when the residents w ere ‘v accinated’ they had 19 positiv e cases in
tw o w eeks with eight dying.
It’s not the ‘vaccine’ – honest
The obvious cause and eﬀect w as being ignored by the media and
most of the public. Australia’ s health minister Greg Hunt (a former
head of strategy at the W orld Economic Forum) w as admi ed to
hospital a er he had the ‘v accine’. He w as suﬀering according to
reports from the skin infection ‘cellulitis’ and it must hav e been a
sev ere case to hav e w arranted days in hospital. Immediately the
authorities said this w as nothing to do with the ‘v accine’ when an
eﬀect of some v accines is a ‘cellulitis-like reaction’. W e had families
of perfectly healthy old people who died a er the ‘v accine’ saying
that if only they had been giv en the ‘v accine’ earlier they w ould still
be aliv e. As a numbskull rating that is oﬀ the chart. A father of four
‘died of Covid’ at aged 48 when he w as taken ill tw o days a er
having the ‘v accine’. The man, a health administrator , had been
‘shielding during the pandemic’ and had ‘not really le  the house’
until he w ent for the ‘v accine’. Having the ‘v accine’ and then falling
ill and dying does not seem to hav e qualiﬁed as a possible cause and
eﬀect and ‘Covid-19’ w ent on his death certiﬁcate. His family said
they had no idea how he ‘caught the virus’. A family member said:
‘T ragically , it could be that going for a v accination ultimately led to
him catching Covid …The sad truth is that they are nev er going to
know where it came from.’ The family w arned people to rememberthat the virus still existed and w as ‘v ery real’. So w as their stupidity .
Nurses and doctors who had the ﬁrst round of the ‘v accine’ w ere
collapsing, dying and ending up in a hospital bed while they or their
grieving relativ es w ere saying they’ d still hav e the ‘v accine’ again
despite what happened. I kid y ou not. Y ou mean if y our husband
returned from the dead he’ d hav e the same ‘v accine’ again that killed
him??
Doctors at the VCU Medical Center in Richmond, V irginia, said
the Johnson & Johnson ‘v accine’ w as to blame for a man’ s skin
peeling oﬀ. P atient Richard T errell said: ‘It all just happened so fast.
My skin peeled oﬀ. It’ s still coming oﬀ on my hands now .’ He said it
w as stinging, burning and itching and when he bent his arms and
legs it w as v ery painful with ‘the skin sw ollen and rubbing against
itself ’. Pﬁzer/BioNT ech and Moderna v accines use mRNA to change
the cell while the Johnson & Johnson v ersion uses DNA in a process
similar to AstraZeneca’ s technique. Johnson & Johnson and
AstraZeneca hav e both had their ‘v accines’ paused by many
countries a er causing serious blood problems. T errell’ s doctor Fnu
Nutan said he could hav e died if he hadn’ t got medical a ention. It
sounds terrible so what did Nutan and T errell say about the ‘v accine’
now? Oh, they still recommend that people hav e it. A nurse in a
hospital bed 40 minutes a er the v accination and unable to sw allow
due to throat sw elling w as told by a doctor that he lost mobility in
his arm for 36 hours following the v accination. What did he say to
the ailing nurse? ‘Good for y ou for ge ing the v accination.’ W e are
dealing with a serious form of cognitiv e dissonance madness in both
public and medical staﬀ. There is a remarkable correlation betw een
those having the ‘v accine’ and trumpeting the fact and suﬀering bad
happenings shortly a erw ards. W itold Rogiewicz, a P olish doctor ,
made a video of his ‘v accination’ and ridiculed those who w ere
questioning its safety and the intentions of Bill Gates: ‘V accinate
y ourself to protect y ourself, y our lov ed ones, friends and also
patients. And to mention quickly I hav e info for anti-v axxers and
anti-Coviders if y ou w ant to contact Bill Gates y ou can do this
through me.’ He further ridiculed the dangers of 5G. Days later hew as dead, but naturally the v accination w asn’ t mentioned in the
v erdict of ‘heart a ack’.
Lies, lies and more lies
So many members of the human race hav e slipped into extreme
states of insanity and unfortunately they include reframed doctors
and nursing staﬀ. Having a ‘v accine’ and dying within minutes or
hours is not considered a v alid connection while death from any
cause within 28 days or longer of a positiv e test with a test not
testing for the ‘virus’ means ‘Covid-19’ goes on the death certiﬁcate.
How could that ‘v accine’-death connection not hav e been made
except by calculated deceit? US ﬁgures in the initial rollout period to
February 12th, 2020, rev ealed that a third of the deaths reported to
the CDC a er ‘Covid v accines’ happened within 48 hours. Fiv e men
in the UK suﬀered an ‘extremely rare’ blood clot problem a er
having the AstraZeneca ‘v accine’, but no causal link w as established
said the Gates-funded Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA) which had giv en the ‘v accine’
emergency approv al to be used. Former Pﬁzer executiv e Dr Michael
Y eadon explained in his interview how the procedures could cause
blood coagulation and clots. P eople who should hav e been at no risk
w ere dying from blood clots in the brain and he said he had heard
from medical doctor friends that people w ere suﬀering from skin
bleeding and massiv e headaches. The AstraZeneca ‘shot’ w as
stopped by some 20 countries ov er the blood clo ing issue and still
the corrupt MHRA, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) and the
W orld Health Organization said that it should continue to be giv en
ev en though the EMA admi ed that it ‘still cannot rule out
deﬁnitiv ely’ a link betw een blood clo ing and the ‘v accine’. Later
Marco Cav aleri, head of EMA v accine strategy , said there w as indeed
a clear link betw een the ‘v accine’ and thrombosis, but they didn’ t
know why . So much for the trials showing the ‘v accine’ is safe. Blood
clots w ere aﬀecting y ounger people who w ould be under virtually
no danger from ‘Covid’ ev en if it existed which makes it all the more
stupid and sinister .The British gov ernment responded to public alarm by wheeling
out June Raine, the terrifyingly w eak infant school headmistress
sound-alike who heads the UK MHRA drug ‘regulator ’. The idea
that she w ould stand up to Big Pharma and gov ernment pressure is
laughable and she told us that all w as w ell in the same w ay that she
did when allowing untested, nev er -used-on-humans-before,
genetically-manipulating ‘v accines’ to be exposed to the public in the
ﬁrst place. Mass lying is the new normal of the ‘Covid’ era. The
MHRA later said 30 cases of rare blood clots had by then been
connected with the AstraZeneca ‘v accine’ (that means a lot more in
reality) while stressing that the beneﬁts of the jab in prev enting
‘Covid-19’ outw eighed any risks. A more ridiculous and
disingenuous statement with callous disregard for human health it is
hard to contemplate. Immediately a er the mendacious ‘all-clears’
tw o hospital w orkers in Denmark experienced blood clots and
cerebral haemorrhaging following the AstraZeneca jab and one died.
T op Norw egian health oﬃcial P ål Andre Holme said the ‘v accine’
w as the only common factor: ‘There is nothing in the patient history
of these individuals that can giv e such a pow erful immune response
… I am conﬁdent that the antibodies that w e hav e found are the
cause, and I see no other explanation than it being the v accine which
triggers it.’ Strokes, a clot or bleed in the brain, w ere clearly
associated with the ‘v accine’ from w ord of mouth and whistleblow er
reports. Similar consequences follow ed with all these ‘v accines’ that
w e w ere told w ere so safe and as the numbers grew by the day it
w as clear w e w ere witnessing human carnage.
Learning the hard way
A w oman interview ed by UKColumn told how her husband
suﬀered dramatic health eﬀects a er the v accine when he’ d been in
good health all his life. He w ent from being a li le unw ell to losing
all feeling in his legs and experiencing ‘excruciating pain’.
Misdiagnosis follow ed twice at Accident and Emergency (an
‘allergy’ and ‘sciatica’) before he w as admi ed to a neurology w ard
where doctors said his serious condition had been caused by the‘v accine’. Another sev en ‘v accinated’ people w ere apparently being
treated on the same w ard for similar symptoms. The w oman said he
had the ‘v accine’ because they believ ed media claims that it w as safe.
‘I didn’ t think the gov ernment w ould giv e out a v accine that does
this to somebody; I believ ed they w ould be bringing out a
v accination that w ould be safe.’ What a tragic w ay to learn that
lesson. Another w oman posted that her husband w as transporting
stroke patients to hospital on almost ev ery shi  and when he asked
them if they had been ‘v accinated’ for ‘Covid’ they all replied ‘y es’.
One had a ‘massiv e brain bleed’ the day a er his second dose. She
said her husband reported the ‘just been v accinated’ information
ev ery time to doctors in A and E only for them to ignore it, make no
notes and appear annoy ed that it w as ev en mentioned. This
particular report cannot be v eriﬁed, but it expresses a common
theme that conﬁrms the monumental underreporting of ‘v accine’
consequences. Interestingly as the ‘v accines’ and their brain blood
clot/stroke consequences began to emerge the UK National Health
Service began a publicity campaign telling the public what to do in
the ev ent of a stroke. A Sco ish NHS staﬀ nurse who quit in disgust
in March, 2021, said:
I  h a v e  s e e n  t r a u m a t i c  i n j u r i e s  f r o m  t h e  v a c c i n e ,  t h e y ’ r e  n o t  g e t t i n g  r e p o r t e d  t o  t h e  y e l l o w  c a r d
[ a d v e r s e  r e a c t i o n ]  s c h e m e ,  t h e y ’ r e  t r e a t i n g  t h e  s y m p t o m s ,  n o t  a s k i n g  w h y ,  w h y  i t ’ s  h a p p e n i n g .
I t ’ s  j u s t  t r e a t i n g  t h e  s y m p t o m s  a n d  w h e n  y o u  s p e a k  a b o u t  i t  y o u ’ r e  d i s m i s s e d  l i k e  y o u ’ r e  c r a z y ,
I ’ m  n o t  c r a z y ,  I ’ m  n o t  c r a z y  b e c a u s e  e v e r y  o t h e r  c o l l e a g u e  I ’ v e  s p o k e n  t o  i s  t e r r i f i e d  t o  s p e a k
o u t ,  t h e y ’ v e  h a d  e n o u g h .
V ideos appeared on the Internet of people uncontrollably shaking
a er the ‘v accine’ with no control ov er muscles, limbs and ev en their
face. A Sco ish mother broke out in a sev ere rash all ov er her body
almost immediately a er she w as giv en the AstraZeneca ‘v accine’.
The pictures w ere horriﬁc. Leigh King, a 41-y ear -old hairdresser
from Lanarkshire said: ‘Nev er in my life w as I prepared for what I
w as about to experience … My skin w as so sore and constantly hot
… I hav e nev er felt pain like this …’ But don’ t y ou w orry , the
‘v accine’ is perfectly safe. Then there has been the eﬀect on medicalstaﬀ who hav e been pressured to hav e the ‘v accine’ by psychopathic
‘health’ authorities and gov ernment. A London hospital consultant
who gav e the name K. P oly akov a wrote this to the British Medical
Journal  or BMJ :
I  a m  c u r r e n t l y  s t r u g g l i n g  w i t h  …  t h e  f a i l u r e  t o  r e p o r t  t h e  r e a l i t y  o f  t h e  m o r b i d i t y  c a u s e d  b y  o u r
c u r r e n t  v a c c i n a t i o n  p r o g r a m  w i t h i n  t h e  h e a l t h  s e r v i c e  a n d  s t a f f  p o p u l a t i o n .  T h e  l e v e l s  o f
s i c k n e s s  a f t e r  v a c c i n a t i o n  i s  u n p r e c e d e n t e d  a n d  s t a f f  a r e  g e t t i n g  v e r y  s i c k  a n d  s o m e  w i t h
n e u r o l o g i c a l  s y m p t o m s  w h i c h  i s  h a v i n g  a  h u g e  i m p a c t  o n  t h e  h e a l t h  s e r v i c e  f u n c t i o n .  E v e n
t h e  y o u n g  a n d  h e a l t h y  a r e  o f f  f o r  d a y s ,  s o m e  f o r  w e e k s ,  a n d  s o m e  r e q u i r i n g  m e d i c a l
t r e a t m e n t .  W h o l e  t e a m s  a r e  b e i n g  t a k e n  o u t  a s  t h e y  w e n t  t o  g e t  v a c c i n a t e d  t o g e t h e r .
M a n d a t o r y  v a c c i n a t i o n  i n  t h i s  i n s t a n c e  i s  s t u p i d ,  u n e t h i c a l  a n d  i r r e s p o n s i b l e  w h e n  i t  c o m e s  t o
p r o t e c t i n g  o u r  s t a f f  a n d  p u b l i c  h e a l t h .  W e  a r e  i n  t h e  v o l u n t a r y  p h a s e  o f  v a c c i n a t i o n ,  a n d
e n c o u r a g i n g  s t a f f  t o  t a k e  a n  u n l i c e n s e d  p r o d u c t  t h a t  i s  i m p a c t i n g  o n  t h e i r  i m m e d i a t e  h e a l t h  …
i t  i s  c l e a r l y  s t a t e d  t h a t  t h e s e  v a c c i n e  p r o d u c t s  d o  n o t  o f f e r  i m m u n i t y  o r  s t o p  t r a n s m i s s i o n .  I n
w h i c h  c a s e  w h y  a r e  w e  d o i n g  i t ?
Not to protect health that’ s for sure. Medical w orkers are lauded by
gov ernments for agenda reasons when they couldn’ t giv e a toss
about them any more than they can for the population in general.
Schools across America faced the same situation as they closed due
to the high number of teachers and other staﬀ with bad reactions to
the Pﬁzer/BioNT ech, Moderna, and Johnson & Johnson ‘Covid
v accines’ all of which w ere linked to death and serious adv erse
eﬀects. The BMJ  took down the consultant’ s comments pre y
quickly on the grounds that they w ere being used to spread
‘disinformation’. They w ere exposing the truth about the ‘v accine’
w as the real reason. The cov er -up is breathtaking.
Hiding the evidence
The scale of the ‘v accine’ death cov er -up w orldwide can be
conﬁrmed by comparing oﬃcial ﬁgures with the personal experience
of the public. I heard of many people in my community who died
immediately or soon a er the v accine that w ould nev er appear in the
media or ev en likely on the oﬃcial totals of ‘v accine’ fatalities and
adv erse reactions when only about ten percent are estimated to bereported and I hav e seen some estimates as low as one percent in a
Harv ard study . In the UK alone by April 29th, 2021, some 757,654
adv erse reactions had been oﬃcially reported from the
Pﬁzer/BioNT ech, Oxford/AstraZeneca and Moderna ‘v accines’ with
more than a thousand deaths linked to jabs and that means an
estimated ten times this number in reality from a ten percent
reporting rate percentage. That’ s sev en million adv erse reactions and
10,000 potential deaths and a one percent reporting rate w ould be
ten times those  ﬁgures. In 1976 the US gov ernment pulled the swine
ﬂu v accine a er 53  deaths. The UK data included a combined 10,000
ey e disorders from the ‘Covid v accines’ with more than 750 suﬀering
visual impairment or blindness and again multiply by the estimated
reporting percentages. As ‘Covid cases’ oﬃcially fell hospitals
virtually empty during the ‘Covid crisis’ began to ﬁll up with a
range of other problems in the w ake of the ‘v accine’ rollout. The
numbers across America hav e also been catastrophic. Deaths linked
to all  types of v accine increased by 6,000 percent  in the ﬁrst quarter of
2021 compared with 2020. A 39-y ear -old w oman from Ogden, Utah,
died four days a er receiving a second dose of Moderna’ s ‘Covid
v accine’ when her liv er , heart and kidneys all failed despite the fact
that she had no known medical issues or conditions. Her family
sought an autopsy , but Dr Erik Christensen, Utah’ s chief medical
examiner , said proving v accine injury as a cause of death almost
nev er happened. He could think of only one instance where an
autopsy w ould name a v accine as the oﬃcial cause of death and that
w ould be anaphylaxis where someone receiv ed a v accine and died
almost instantaneously . ‘Short of that, it w ould be diﬃcult for us to
deﬁnitiv ely say this is the v accine,’ Christensen said. If that is true
this must be added to the estimated ten percent (or far less)
reporting rate of v accine deaths and serious reactions and the
conclusion can only be that v accine deaths and serious reactions –
including these ‘Covid’ potions’ – are phenomenally understated in
oﬃcial ﬁgures. The same story can be found ev erywhere. Endless
accounts of deaths and serious reactions among the public, medicaland care home staﬀ while oﬃcial ﬁgures did not ev en begin to
reﬂect this.
Professional script-reader Dr David W illiams, a ‘top public-health
oﬃcial’ in Ontario, Canada, insulted our intelligence by claiming
only four serious adv erse reactions and no deaths from the more
than 380,000 v accine doses then giv en. This bore no resemblance to
what people knew had happened in their owns circles and w e had
Dirk Huy er in charge of ge ing millions v accinated in Ontario while
at the same time he w as Chief Coroner for the province inv estigating
causes of death including possible death from the v accine. An aide
said he had stepped back from inv estigating deaths, but evidence
indicated otherwise. Rosemary Frei, who secured a Master of Science
degree in molecular biology at the Faculty of Medicine at Canada’ s
Univ ersity of Calgary before turning to inv estigativ e journalism, w as
one who could see that oﬃcial ﬁgures for ‘v accine’ deaths and
reactions made no sense. She said that doctors seldom reported
adv erse ev ents and when people got really sick or died a er ge ing
a v accination they w ould a ribute that to anything except the
v accines. It had been that w ay for y ears and any one who w ondered
aloud whether the ‘Covid v accines’ or other shots cause harm is
immediately branded as ‘anti-v ax’ and ‘anti-science’. This w as
‘career -threatening’ for health professionals. Then there w as the
huge pressure to support the push to ‘v accinate’ billions in the
quickest time possible. Frei said:
S o  t h a t ’ s  w h e r e  w e ’ r e  a t  t o d a y .  M o r e  t h a n  h a l f  a  m i l l i o n  v a c c i n e  d o s e s  h a v e  b e e n  g i v e n  t o
p e o p l e  i n  O n t a r i o  a l o n e .  T h e  r u s h  i s  o n  t o  v a c c i n a t e  a l l  1 5  m i l l i o n  o f  u s  i n  t h e  p r o v i n c e  b y
S e p t e m b e r .  A n d  t h e  m a i n s t r e a m  m e d i a  a r e  s c r e a m i n g  f o r  t h i s  t o  b e  s p e d  u p  e v e n  m o r e .  T h a t
a l l  a d d s  u p  t o  o n l y  a  v e r y  s l i m  l i k e l i h o o d  t h a t  w e ’ r e  g o i n g  t o  b e  t o l d  t h e  t r u t h  b y  o f f i c i a l s
a b o u t  h o w  m a n y  p e o p l e  a r e  g e t t i n g  s i c k  o r  d y i n g  f r o m  t h e  v a c c i n e s .
What is true of Ontario is true of ev erywhere.
They KNEW – and still did it
The authorities knew what w as going to happen with multiple
deaths and adv erse reactions. The UK gov ernment’ s Gates-fundedand Big Pharma-dominated Medicines and Healthcare products
Regulatory Agency (MHRA) hired a company to employ AI in
compiling the projected reactions to the ‘v accine’ that w ould
otherwise be uncountable. The request for applications said: ‘The
MHRA urgently seeks an Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) so w are tool to
process the expected high v olume of Covid-19 v accine Adv erse Drug
Reaction …’ This w as from the agency , headed by the disingenuous
June Raine, that gav e the ‘v accines’ emergency approv al and the
company w as hired before the ﬁrst shot w as giv en. ‘W e are going to
kill and maim y ou – is that okay?’ ‘Oh, y es, perfectly ﬁne – I’ m v ery
grateful, thank y ou, doctor .’ The range of ‘Covid v accine’ adv erse
reactions goes on for page a er page in the MHRA criminally
underreported ‘Y ellow Card’ system and includes aﬀects to ey es,
ears, skin, digestion, blood and so on. Raine’ s MHRA amazingly
claimed that the ‘ov erall safety experience … is so far as expected
from the clinical trials’. The death, serious adv erse eﬀects, deafness
and blindness w ere expected?  When did they ev er mention that? If
these human tragedies w ere expected then those that gav e approv al
for the use of these ‘v accines’ must be guilty of crimes against
humanity including murder – a deﬁnition of which is ‘killing a
person with malice aforethought or with recklessness manifesting
extreme indiﬀerence to the v alue of human life.’ P eople inv olv ed at
the MHRA, the CDC in America and their equiv alent around the
w orld must go before Nuremberg trials to answ er for their callous
inhumanity . W e are only talking here about the immediate eﬀects of
the ‘v accine’. The longer -term impact of the DNA synthetic
manipulation is the main reason they are so hysterically desperate to
inoculate the entire global population in the shortest possible time.
Africa and the dev eloping w orld are a major focus for the ‘v accine’
depopulation agenda and a mass v accination sales-pitch is
underw ay thanks to caring people like the Rockefellers and other
Cult assets. The Rockefeller Foundation, which pre-empted the
‘Covid pandemic’ in a document published in 2010 that ‘predicted’
what happened a decade later , announced an initial $34.95 million
grant in February , 2021, ‘to ensure more equitable access to Covid-19testing and v accines’ among other things in Africa in collaboration
with ‘24 organizations, businesses, and gov ernment agencies’. The
pan-Africa initiativ e w ould focus on 10 countries: Burkina Faso,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Keny a, Nigeria, Rw anda, South Africa, T anzania,
Uganda, and Zambia’. Rajiv Shah, President of the Rockefeller
Foundation and former administrator of CIA-controlled USAID, said
that if Africa w as not mass-v accinated (to change the DNA of its
people) it w as a ‘threat to all of humanity’ and not fair on Africans.
When someone from the Rockefeller Foundation says they w ant to
do something to help poor and depriv ed people and countries it is
time for a belly-laugh. They are doing this out of the goodness of
their ‘heart’ because ‘v accinating’ the entire global population is
what the ‘Covid’ hoax set out to achiev e. Oﬃcial ‘decolonisation’ of
Africa by the Cult w as merely a prelude to ﬁnancial colonisation on
the road to a return to physical colonisation. The ‘v accine’ is vital to
that and the sudden and conv enient death of the ‘Covid’ sceptic
president of T anzania can be seen in its true light. A lot of people in
Africa are aw are that this is another form of colonisation and
exploitation and they need to stand their ground.
The ‘vaccine is working’ scam
A potential problem for the Cult w as that the ‘v accine’ is meant to
change human DNA and body messaging and not to protect any one
from a ‘virus’ nev er shown to exist. The v accine couldn’ t w ork
because it w as not designed to w ork and how could they make it
appear  to be w orking so that more people w ould hav e it? This w as
ov ercome by low ering the ampliﬁcation rate of the PCR test to
produce few er ‘cases’ and therefore few er ‘deaths’. Some of us had
been pointing out since March, 2020, that the ampliﬁcation rate of
the test not testing for the ‘virus’ had been made artiﬁcially high to
generate positiv e tests which they could call ‘cases’ to justify
lockdowns. The W orld Health Organization recommended an
absurdly high 45 ampliﬁcation cycles to ensure the high positiv es
required by the Cult and then remained silent on the issue until
January 20th, 2021 – Biden’ s Inauguration Day . This w as when the‘v accinations’ w ere seriously underw ay and on that day the WHO
recommended a er discussions with America’ s CDC that
laboratories lowered their testing amplification . Dr David Samadi, a
certiﬁed urologist and health writer , said the WHO w as encouraging
all labs to reduce their cycle count for PCR tests. He said the current
cycle w as much too high and w as ‘resulting in any particle being
declared a positiv e case’. Ev en one mainstream news report I saw
said this meant the number of ‘Covid’ infections may hav e been
‘dramatically inﬂated’. Oh, just a li le bit. The CDC in America
issued new guidance to laboratories in April, 2021, to use 28 cycles
but only for ‘vaccinated’ people . The timing of the CDC/WHO
interv entions w ere cynically designed to make it appear the
‘v accines’ w ere responsible for falling cases and deaths when the real
reason can be seen in the following examples. New Y ork’ s state lab,
the W adsw orth Center , identiﬁed 872 positiv e tests in July , 2020,
based on a threshold of 40 cycles. When the ﬁgure w as low ered to 35
cycles 43 percent  of the 872 w ere no longer ‘positiv es’. At 30 cycles
the ﬁgure w as 63 percent. A Massachuse s lab found that betw een
85 to 90 percent  of people who tested positiv e in July with a cycle
threshold of 40 w ould be negativ e at 30 cycles, Ashish Jha, MD,
director of the Harv ard Global Health Institute, said: ‘I’ m really
shocked that it could be that high … Boy , does it really change the
w ay w e need to be thinking about testing.’ I’ m shocked that I could
see the obvious in the spring of 2020, with no medical background,
and most medical professionals still hav en’ t w orked it out. No, that’ s
not shocking – it’ s terrifying.
Three w eeks a er the WHO directiv e to low er PCR cycles the
London Daily Mail  ran this headline: ‘Why ARE Covid cases
plummeting? New infections hav e fallen 45% in the US and 30%
globally in the past 3 w eeks but experts say v accine is NOT the main
driv er because only 8% of Americans and 13% of people w orldwide
hav e receiv ed their ﬁrst dose.’ They acknowledged that the drop
could not be a ributed to the ‘v accine’, but soon this morphed
throughout the media into the ‘v accine’ has caused cases and deaths
to fall when it w as the PCR threshold. In December , 2020, there w aschaos at English Channel ports with truck driv ers needing negativ e
‘Covid’ tests before they could board a ferry home for Christmas.
The gov ernment w anted to remov e the backlog as fast as possible
and they brought in troops to do the ‘testing’. Out of 1,600 driv ers
just 36  tested positiv e and the rest w ere giv en the all clear to cross
the Channel. I guess the authorities thought that 36 w as the least
they could get aw ay with without the unquestioning catching on.
The ampliﬁcation trick which most people believ ed in the absence of
information in the mainstream applied more pressure on those
refusing the ‘v accine’ to succumb when it ‘obviously w orked’. The
truth w as the exact opposite with deaths in care homes soaring with
the ‘v accine’ and in Israel the term used w as ‘skyrocket’. A re-
analysis of published data from the Israeli Health Ministry led by Dr
Herv é Seligmann at the Medicine Emerging Infectious and T ropical
Diseases at Aix-Marseille Univ ersity found that Pﬁzer ’ s ‘Covid
v accine’ killed ‘about 40 times more [elderly] people than the disease
itself w ould hav e killed’ during a ﬁv e-w eek v accination period and
260 times  more y ounger people than w ould hav e died from the
‘virus’ ev en according to the manipulated ‘virus’ ﬁgures. Dr
Seligmann and his co-study author , Haim Y ativ , declared a er
reviewing the Israeli ‘v accine’ death data: ‘This is a new Holocaust.’
Then, in mid-April, 2021, a er v ast numbers of people w orldwide
had been ‘v accinated’, the story changed with clear coordination.
The UK gov ernment began to prepare the ground for more future
lockdowns when Nuremberg-destined Boris Johnson told y et
another whopper . He said that cases had fallen because of lockdowns
not ‘v accines’. Lockdowns are irrelev ant when there is no ‘virus’  and
the test and fraudulent death certiﬁcates are deciding the number of
‘cases’ and ‘deaths’. Study a er study has shown that lockdowns
don’ t w ork and instead kill and psychologically destroy people.
Meanwhile in the United States Anthony Fauci and Rochelle
W alensky , the ultra-Zionist head of the CDC, peddled the same line.
More lockdown w as the answ er and not the ‘v accine’, a line repeated
on cue by the moron that is Canadian Prime Minister Justin T rudeau.
Why all the hysteria to get ev ery one ‘v accinated’ if lockdowns andnot ‘v accines’ made the diﬀerence? None of it makes sense on the
face of it. Oh, but it does. The Cult w ants lockdowns and  the
‘v accine’ and if the ‘v accine’ is allow ed to be seen as the total answ er
lockdowns w ould no longer be justiﬁed when there are still
liv elihoods to destroy . ‘V ariants’ and renew ed upw ard manipulation
of PCR ampliﬁcation are planned to instigate nev er -ending
lockdown and  more ‘v accines’.
You must have it – we’re desperate
Israel, where the Jewish and Arab population are ruled by the
Sabbatian Cult, w as the front-runner in imposing the DNA-
manipulating ‘v accine’ on its people to such an extent that Jewish
refusers began to liken what w as happening to the early y ears of
Nazi Germany . This w ould seem to be a fantastic claim. Why w ould
a gov ernment of Jewish people be acting like the Nazis did? If y ou
realise that the Sabbatian Cult w as behind the Nazis and that
Sabbatians hate Jews the pieces start to ﬁt and the question of why a
‘Jewish’ gov ernment w ould treat Jews with such callous disregard
for their liv es and freedom ﬁnds an answ er . Those controlling the
gov ernment of Israel aren’t Jewish  – they’ re Sabbatian. Israeli lawy er
T amir T urgal w as one who made the Nazi comparison in comments
to German lawy er Reiner Fuellmich who is leading a class action
lawsuit against the psychopaths for crimes against humanity . T urgal
described how the Israeli gov ernment w as v accinating children and
pregnant w omen on the basis that there w as no evidence that this
w as dangerous when they had no evidence that it wasn’t  dangerous
either . They just had no evidence. This w as medical experimentation
and T urgal said this breached the Nuremberg Code about medical
experimentation and procedures requiring informed consent and
choice. Think about that. A Nuremberg Code dev eloped because of
Nazi experimentation on Jews and others in concentration camps by
people like the evil-bey ond-belief Josef Mengele is being breached by
the Israeli  gov ernment; but when y ou know that it’ s a Sabbatian
gov ernment along with its intelligence and military agencies like
Mossad, Shin Bet and the Israeli Defense Forces, and that Sabbatiansw ere the force behind the Nazis, the kaleidoscope comes into focus.
What hav e w e come to when Israeli Jews are suing their gov ernment
for violating the Nuremberg Code by essentially making Israelis
subject to a medical experiment using the controv ersial ‘v accines’?
It’ s a shocker that this has to be done in the light of what happened
in Nazi Germany . The Anshe Ha-Emet, or ‘P eople of the T ruth’,
made up of Israeli doctors, lawy ers, campaigners and public, hav e
launched a lawsuit with the International Criminal Court. It says:
W h e n  t h e  h e a d s  o f  t h e  M i n i s t r y  o f  H e a l t h  a s  w e l l  a s  t h e  p r i m e  m i n i s t e r  p r e s e n t e d  t h e  v a c c i n e
i n  I s r a e l  a n d  b e g a n  t h e  v a c c i n a t i o n  o f  I s r a e l i  r e s i d e n t s ,  t h e  v a c c i n a t e d  w e r e  n o t  a d v i s e d ,  t h a t ,
i n  p r a c t i c e ,  t h e y  a r e  t a k i n g  p a r t  i n  a  m e d i c a l  e x p e r i m e n t  a n d  t h a t  t h e i r  c o n s e n t  i s  r e q u i r e d  f o r
t h i s  u n d e r  t h e  N u r e m b e r g  C o d e .
The irony is unbeliev able, but easily explained in one w ord:
Sabbatians. The foundation of Israeli ‘Covid’ apartheid is the ‘green
pass’ or ‘green passport’ which allows Jews and Arabs who hav e
had the DNA-manipulating ‘v accine’ to go about their liv es – to
w ork, ﬂy , trav el in general, go to shopping malls, bars, restaurants,
hotels, concerts, gyms, swimming pools, theatres and sports v enues,
while non-’v accinated’ are banned from all those places and
activities. Israelis hav e likened the ‘green pass’ to the y ellow stars
that Jews in Nazi Germany w ere forced to w ear – the same as the
y ellow stickers that a branch of UK supermarket chain Morrisons
told exempt mask-w ears they had to display when shopping. How
v ery sensitiv e. The Israeli system is blatant South African-style
apartheid on the basis of compliance or non-compliance to fascism
rather than colour of the skin. How appropriate that the Sabbatian
Israeli gov ernment w as so close to the pre-Mandela apartheid
regime in Pretoria. The Sabbatian-instigated ‘v accine passport’ in
Israel is planned for ev erywhere. Sabbatians struck a deal with
Pﬁzer that allow ed them to lead the w ay in the percentage of a
national population infused with synthetic material and the result
w as catastrophic. Israeli freedom activist Shai Dannon told me how
chairs w ere appearing on beaches that said ‘v accinated only’. Health
Minister Y uli Edelstein said that any one unwilling or unable to getthe jabs that ‘confer immunity’ will be ‘le  behind’. The man’ s a liar .
Not ev en the makers claim the ‘v accines’ confer immunity . When
y ou see those ﬁgures of ‘v accine’ deaths these psychopaths w ere
saying that y ou must take the chance the ‘v accine’ will kill y ou or
maim y ou while knowing it will change y our DNA or lockdown for
y ou will be permanent. That’ s fascism. The Israeli parliament passed
a law to allow personal information of the non-v accinated to be
shared with local and national authorities for three months. This w as
claimed by its supporters to be a w ay to ‘encourage’ people to be
v accinated. Hadas Ziv from Physicians for Human Rights described
this as a ‘draconian law which crushed medical ethics and the
patient rights’. But that’ s the idea, the Sabbatians w ould reply .
Your papers, please
Sabbatian Israel w as leading what has been planned all along to be a
global ‘v accine pass’ called a ‘green passport’ without which y ou
w ould remain in permanent lockdown restriction and unable to do
anything. This is how badly – desperately  – the Cult is to get ev ery one
‘v accinated’. The term and colour ‘green’ w as not by chance and
related to the psychology of fusing the perception of the green
climate hoax with the ‘Covid’ hoax and how the ‘solution’ to both is
the same Great Reset. L ying politicians, health oﬃcials and
psychologists denied there w ere any plans for mandatory
v accinations or restrictions based on v accinations, but they knew
that w as exactly what w as meant to happen with gov ernments of all
countries reaching agreements to enforce a global system. ‘Free’
Denmark and ‘free’ Sw eden unv eiled digital v accine certiﬁcation.
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Greece, Hungary , Iceland, Italy ,
P oland, P ortugal, Slov akia, and Spain hav e all commi ed to a
v accine passport system and the rest including the whole of the EU
w ould follow . The satanic UK gov ernment will certainly go this w ay
despite mendacious denials and at the time of writing it is trying to
manipulate the public into having the ‘v accine’ so they could go
abroad on a summer holiday . How w ould that w ork without
something to prov e y ou had the synthetic toxicity injected into y ou?Documents show that the EU’ s European Commission w as moving
tow ards ‘v accine certiﬁcates’ in 2018 and 2019 before the ‘Covid’
hoax began. They knew what w as coming. Abracadabra – Ursula
v on der Ley en, the German President of the Commission,
announced in March, 2021, an EU ‘Digital Green Certiﬁcate’ – green
again – to track the public’ s ‘Covid status’. The passport sting is
w orldwide and the Far East follow ed the same pa ern with South
Korea ruling that only those with ‘v accination’ passports – again the
green  pass – w ould be able to ‘return to their daily liv es’.
Bill Gates has been preparing for this ‘passport’ with other Cult
operativ es for y ears and bey ond the paper v ersion is a Gates-funded
‘digital ta oo’ to identify who has been v accinated and who hasn’ t.
The ‘ta oo’ is reported to include a substance which is externally
readable to conﬁrm who has been v accinated. This is a bio-luminous
light-generating enzyme (think ﬁreﬂies) called … Luciferase . Y es,
named a er the Cult ‘god’ Lucifer the ‘light bringer ’ of whom more
to come. Gates said he funded the readable ta oo to ensure children
in the dev eloping w orld w ere v accinated and no one w as missed out.
He cares so much about poor kids as w e know . This w as just the
cov er story to dev elop a v accine tagging system for ev ery one on the
planet. Gates has been funding the ID2020 ‘alliance’ to do just that in
league with other lov ely people at Microso , GA VI, the Rockefeller
Foundation, Accenture and IDEO.org. He said in interviews in
March, 2020, before any ‘v accine’ publicly existed, that the w orld
must hav e a globalised digital certiﬁcate to track the ‘virus’ and who
had been v accinated. Gates knew from the start that the mRNA
v accines w ere coming and when they w ould come and that the plan
w as to tag the ‘v accinated’ to marginalise the intelligent and stop
them doing anything including trav el. Evil just doesn’ t suﬃce. Gates
w as exposed for oﬀering a $10 million bribe to the Nigerian House
of Representativ es to inv oke compulsory ‘Covid’ v accination of all
Nigerians. Sara Cunial, a member of the Italian P arliament, called
Gates a ‘v accine criminal’. She urged the Italian President to hand
him ov er to the International Criminal Court for crimes againsthumanity and condemned his plans to ‘chip the human race’
through ID2020.
Y ou know it’ s a long-planned agenda when w ar criminal and Cult
gofer T ony Blair is on the case. W ith the scale of arrogance only
someone as dark as Blair can muster he said: ‘V accination in the end
is going to be y our route to liberty .’ Blair is a disgusting piece of
w ork and he conﬁrms that again. The media has giv en a lot of
cov erage to a bloke called Charlie Mullins, founder of London’ s
biggest independent plumbing company , Pimlico Plumbers, who has
said he w on’ t employ any one who has not been v accinated or hav e
them go to any home where people are not v accinated. He said that
if he had his w ay no one w ould be allow ed to w alk the streets if they
hav e not been v accinated. Gates w as cheering at the time while I w as
alerting the white coats. The plan is that people will qualify for
‘passports’ for having the ﬁrst tw o doses and then to keep it they
will hav e to hav e all the follow ups and new ones for inv ented
‘v ariants’ until human genetics is transformed and many are dead
who can’ t adjust to the changes. Hollyw ood celebrities – the usual
propaganda stunt – are promoting something called the WELL
Health-Safety Rating to v erify that a building or space has ‘taken the
necessary steps to prioritize the health and safety of their staﬀ,
visitors and other stakeholders’. They included Lady Gaga, Jennifer
Lopez, Michael B. Jordan, Robert DeNiro, V enus W illiams, W olfgang
Puck, Deepak Chopra and 17th Surgeon General Richard Carmona.
Y awn. WELL Health-Safety has big connections with China. P arent
company Delos is headed by former Goldman Sachs partner P aul
Scialla. This is another example – and w e will see so many others –
of using the excuse of ‘health’ to dictate the liv es and activities of the
population. I guess one conﬁrmation of the ‘safety’ of buildings is
that only ‘v accinated’ people can go in, right?
Electronic concentration camps
I wrote decades ago about the plans to restrict trav el and here w e are
for those who refuse to bow to tyranny . This can be achiev ed in one
go with air trav el if the aviation industry makes a blanket decree.The ‘v accine’ and guaranteed income are designed to be part of a
global v ersion of China’ s social credit system which tracks behaviour
24/7 and aw ards or deletes ‘credits’ based on whether y our
behaviour is supported by the state or not. I mean y our entire
lifestyle – what y ou do, eat, say , ev erything. Once y our credit score
falls below a certain lev el consequences kick in. In China tens of
millions hav e been denied trav el by air and train because of this. All
the locations and activities denied to refusers by the ‘v accine’
passports will be included in one big mass ban on doing almost
anything for those that don’ t bow their head to gov ernment. It’ s
bey ond fascist and a new term is required to describe its extremes – I
guess fascist technocracy will hav e to do. The w ay the Chinese
system of technological – technocratic – control is sw eeping the W est
can be seen in the Los Angeles school system and is planned to be
expanded w orldwide. Ev ery child is required to hav e a ‘Covid’-
tracking app scanned daily before they can enter the classroom. The
so-called Daily P ass tracking system is produced by Gates’ Microso 
which I’ m sure will shock y ou rigid. The pass will be scanned using
a barcode (one step from an inside-the-body barcode) and the
information will include health checks, ‘Covid’ tests and
v accinations. Entry codes are for one speciﬁc building only and
access will only be allow ed if a student or teacher has a negativ e test
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’, has no symptoms of anything
alleged to be related to ‘Covid’ (symptoms from a range of other
illness), and has a temperature under 100 degrees. No barcode, no
entry , is planned to be the case for ev erywhere and not only schools.
Kids are being psychologically prepared to accept this as ‘normal’
their whole life which is why what they can impose in schools is so
important to the Cult and its gofers. Long-time American freedom
campaigner John Whitehead of the Rutherford Institute w as not
exaggerating when he said: ‘Databit by databit, w e are building our
own electronic concentration camps.’ Canada under its Cult gofer
prime minister Justin T rudeau has taken a major step tow ards the
real thing with people interned against their will if they test positiv e
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’ when they arriv e at a Canadianairport. They are jailed in internment hotels o en without food or
w ater for long periods and with many doors failing to lock there
hav e been sexual assaults. The interned are being charged
sometimes $2,000 for the privilege of being abused in this w ay .
T rudeau is fully on board with the Cult and says the ‘Covid
pandemic’ has provided an opportunity for a global ‘reset’ to
permanently change W estern civilisation. His number tw o, Deputy
Prime Minister Chrystia Freeland, is a trustee of the W orld Economic
Forum and a Rhodes Scholar . The T rudeau family hav e long been
serv ants of the Cult. See The Biggest Secret  and Cathy O’Brien’ s book
Trance-Formation of America  for the horriﬁc background to T rudeau’ s
father Pierre T rudeau another Canadian prime minister . Hide y our
fascism behind the façade of a heart-on-the-sleev e liberal. It’ s a w ell-
honed Cult technique.
What can the ‘vaccine’ really do?
W e hav e a ‘virus’ nev er shown to exist and ‘v ariants’ of the ‘virus’
that hav e also nev er been shown to exist except, like the ‘original’, as
computer -generated ﬁctions. Ev en if y ou believ e there’ s a ‘virus’ the
‘case’ to ‘death’ rate is in the region of 0.23 to 0.15 percent and those
‘deaths’ are concentrated among the v ery old around the same
av erage age that people die anyw ay . In response to this lack of threat
(in truth none) psychopaths and idiots, knowingly and unknowingly
answ ering to Gates and the Cult, are seeking to ‘v accinate’ ev ery
man, w oman and child on Planet Earth. Clearly the ‘v accine’ is not
about ‘Covid’ – none of this ev er has been. So what is it all about
really ? Why the desperation to infuse genetically-manipulating
synthetic material into ev ery one through mRNA fraudulent
‘v accines’ with the intent of doing this ov er and ov er with the
excuses of ‘v ariants’ and other ‘virus’ inv entions? Dr Sherri
T enpenny , an osteopathic medical doctor in the United States, has
made herself an expert on v accines and their eﬀects as a v ehement
campaigner against their use. T enpenny w as board certiﬁed in
emergency medicine, the director of a lev el tw o trauma centre for 12
y ears, and mov ed to Clev eland in 1996 to start an integrativ emedicine practice which has treated patients from all 50 states and
some 17 other countries. W eaning people oﬀ pharmaceutical drugs is
a speciality .
She became interested in the consequences of v accines a er
a ending a meeting at the National V accine Information Center in
W ashington DC in 2000 where she ‘sat through four days of listening
to medical doctors and scientists and lawy ers and parents of v accine
injured kids’ and asked: ‘What’ s going on?’ She had nev er been
v accinated and nev er got ill while her father w as giv en a list of
v accines to be in the military and w as ‘sick his entire life’. The
experience added to her questions and she began to examine v accine
documents from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). A er
reading the ﬁrst one, the 1998 v ersion of The General Recommendations
of Vaccination , she thought: ‘This is it?’ The document w as poorly
wri en and bad science and T enpenny began 20 y ears of research
into v accines that continues to this day . She began her research into
‘Covid v accines’ in March, 2020, and she describes them as ‘deadly’.
For many , as w e hav e seen, they already hav e been. T enpenny said
that in the ﬁrst 30 days of the ‘v accine’ rollout in the United States
there had been more than 40,000 adv erse ev ents reported to the
v accine adv erse ev ent database. A document had been deliv ered to
her the day before that w as 172 pages long. ‘W e hav e ov er 40,000
adv erse ev ents; w e hav e ov er 3,100 cases of [potentially deadly]
anaphylactic shock; w e hav e ov er 5,000 neurological reactions.’
Eﬀects ranged from headaches to numbness, dizziness and v ertigo,
to losing feeling in hands or feet and paraesthesia which is when
limbs ‘fall asleep’ and people hav e the sensation of insects crawling
underneath their skin. All this happened in the ﬁrst 30 days and
remember that only about ten percent  (or far less) of adv erse reactions
and v accine-related deaths are estimated to be oﬃcially reported.
T enpenny said:
S o  c a n  y o u  t h i n k  o f  o n e  s i n g l e  p r o d u c t  i n  a n y  i n d u s t r y ,  a n y  i n d u s t r y ,  f o r  a s  l o n g  a s  p r o d u c t s
h a v e  b e e n  m a d e  o n  t h e  p l a n e t  t h a t  w i t h i n  3 0  d a y s  w e  h a v e  4 0 , 0 0 0  p e o p l e  c o m p l a i n i n g  o f
s i d e  e f f e c t s  t h a t  n o t  o n l y  i s  s t i l l  o n  t h e  m a r k e t  b u t  …  w e ’ v e  g o t  p a i d  a c t o r s  t e l l i n g  u s  h o w  g r e a tt h e y  a r e  f o r  g e t t i n g  t h e i r  v a c c i n e .  W e ’ r e  o f f e r i n g  p e o p l e  $ 5 0 0  i f  t h e y  w i l l  j u s t  g e t  t h e i r  v a c c i n e
a n d  w e ’ v e  g o t  n u r s e s  a n d  d o c t o r s  g o i n g ;  ‘ I  g o t  t h e  v a c c i n e ,  I  g o t  t h e  v a c c i n e ’ .
T enpenny said they w ere not going to be ‘happy dancing folks’
when they began to suﬀer Bell’ s palsy (facial paralysis),
neuropathies, cardiac arrhythmias and autoimmune reactions that
kill through a blood disorder . ‘They’ re not going to be so happy ,
happy then, but w e’ re nev er going to see pictures of those people’
she said. T enpenny described the ‘v accine’ as ‘a w ell-designed killing
tool’.
No off-switch
Bad as the initial consequences had been T enpenny said it w ould be
maybe 14 months before w e began to see the ‘full rav age’ of what is
going to happen to the ‘Covid v accinated’ with full-out
consequences taking anything betw een tw o y ears and 20 y ears to
show . Y ou can understand why when y ou consider that v ariations of
the ‘Covid v accine’ use mRNA (messenger RNA) to in theory
activ ate the immune system to produce protectiv e antibodies
without using the actual ‘virus’. How can they when it’ s a computer
program and they’v e nev er isolated what they claim is the ‘real
thing’? Instead they use synthetic  mRNA. They are inoculating
synthetic material into the body which through a technique known
as the T rojan horse is absorbed into cells to change the nature of
DNA. Human DNA is changed by an infusion of messenger RNA
and with each new ‘v accine’ of this type it is changed ev en more. Say
so and y ou are banned by Cult Internet platforms. The contempt the
contemptuous Mark Zuckerberg has for the truth and human health
can be seen in an internal Facebook video leaked to the Project
V eritas inv estigativ e team in which he said of the ‘Covid v accines’:
‘… I share some caution on this because w e just don’ t know the long
term side-eﬀects of basically modifying people’ s DNA and RNA.’ At
the same time this disgusting man’ s Facebook w as censoring and
banning any one saying exactly the same. He must go before a
Nuremberg trial for crimes against humanity when he knows  that heis censoring legitimate concerns and denying the right of informed
consent on behalf of the Cult that owns him. P eople hav e been killed
and damaged by the v ery ‘v accination’ technique he cast doubt on
himself when they may not hav e had the ‘v accine’ with access to
information that he denied them. The plan is to hav e at least annual
‘Covid v accinations’, add others to deal with inv ented ‘v ariants’, and
change all other v accines into the mRNA system. Pﬁzer executiv es
told shareholders at a virtual Barclays Global Healthcare Conference
in March, 2021, that the public may need a third dose of ‘Covid
v accine’, plus regular y early boosters and the company planned to
hike prices to milk the proﬁts in a ‘signiﬁcant opportunity for our
v accine’. These are the professional liars, cheats and opportunists
who are telling y ou their ‘v accine’ is safe. Giv en this v olume of
mRNA planned to be infused into the human body and its ability to
then replicate w e will hav e a transformation of human genetics from
biological to synthetic biological – exactly the long-time Cult plan for
reasons w e’ll see – and many will die. Sherri T enpenny said of this
replication:
I t ’ s  l i k e  h a v i n g  a n  o n - b u t t o n  b u t  n o  o f f - b u t t o n  a n d  t h a t  w h o l e  m e c h a n i s m  …  t h e y  a c t u a l l y
g i v e  i t  a  n a m e  a n d  t h e y  c a l l  i t  t h e  T r o j a n  h o r s e  m e c h a n i s m ,  b e c a u s e  i t  a l l o w s  t h a t  [ s y n t h e t i c ]
v i r u s  a n d  t h a t  p i e c e  o f  t h a t  [ s y n t h e t i c ]  v i r u s  t o  g e t  i n s i d e  o f  y o u r  c e l l s ,  s t a r t  t o  r e p l i c a t e  a n d
e v e n  g e t  i n s e r t e d  i n t o  o t h e r  p a r t s  o f  y o u r  D N A  a s  a  T r o j a n - h o r s e .
Ask the ov erwhelming majority of people who hav e the ‘v accine’
what they know about the contents and what they do and they
w ould reply: ‘The gov ernment says it will stop me ge ing the virus.’
Gov ernments giv e that false impression on purpose to increase take-
up. Y ou can read Sherri T enpenny’ s detailed analysis of the health
consequences in her blog at V axxter .com , but in summary these are
some of them. She highlights the statement by Bill Gates about how
human beings can become their own ‘v accine manufacturing
machine’. The man is insane. [‘V accine’-generated] ‘antibodies’ carry
synthetic messenger RNA into the cells and the damage starts,
T enpenny contends, and she says that lungs can be adv ersely
aﬀected through v arying degrees of pus and bleeding whichobviously aﬀects breathing and w ould be dubbed ‘Covid-19’. Ev en
more sinister w as the impact of ‘antibodies’ on macrophages, a white
blood cell of the immune system. They consist of T ype 1 and T ype 2
which hav e v ery diﬀerent functions. She said T ype 1 are ‘hyper -
vigilant’ white blood cells which ‘gobble up’ bacteria etc. How ev er ,
in doing so, this could cause inﬂammation and in extreme
circumstances be fatal. She says these aﬀects are mitigated by T ype 2
macrophages which kick in to calm down the system and stop it
going rogue. They clear up dead tissue debris and reduce
inﬂammation that the T ype 1 ‘ﬁre crews’ hav e caused. T ype 1 kills
the infection and T ype 2 heals the damage, she says. This is her
punchline with regard to ‘Covid v accinations’: She says that mRNA
‘antibodies’ block T ype 2 macrophages by a aching to them and
deactiv ating them. This meant that when the T ype 1 response w as
triggered by infection there w as nothing to stop that ge ing out of
hand by calming ev erything down. There’ s an on-switch, but no oﬀ-
switch, she says. What follows can be ‘ov er and out, see y ou when I
see y ou’.
Genetic suicide
T enpenny also highlights the potential for autoimmune disease – the
body a acking itself – which has been associated with v accines since
they ﬁrst appeared. Infusing a synthetic foreign substance into cells
could cause the immune system to react in a panic believing that the
body is being ov erwhelmed by an inv ader (it is) and the
consequences can again be fatal. There is an autoimmune response
known as a ‘cytokine storm’ which I hav e likened to a homeowner
panicked by an intruder and picking up a gun to shoot randomly in
all directions before turning the ﬁre on himself. The immune system
unleashes a storm of inﬂammatory response called cytokines to a
threat and the body commits hara-kiri. The lesson is that y ou mess
with the body’ s immune response at y our peril and these ‘v accines’
seriously – fundamentally – mess with immune response. T enpenny
refers to a consequence called anaphylactic shock which is a sev ere
and highly dangerous allergic reaction when the immune systemﬂoods the body with chemicals. She giv es the example of having a
bee sting which primes the immune system and makes it sensitiv e to
those chemicals. When people are stung again maybe y ears later the
immune response can be so pow erful that it leads to anaphylactic
shock. T enpenny relates this ‘shock’ with regard to the ‘Covid
v accine’ to something called poly ethylene glycol or PEG. Enormous
numbers of people hav e become sensitiv e to this ov er decades of use
in a whole range of products and processes including food, drink,
skin creams and ‘medicine’. Studies hav e claimed that some 72
percent of people hav e antibodies triggered by PEG compared with
tw o percent in the 1960s and allergic hypersensitiv e reactions to this
become a gathering cause for concern. T enpenny points out that the
‘mRNA v accine’ is coated in a ‘bubble’ of poly ethylene glycol which
has the potential to cause anaphylactic shock through immune
sensitivity . Many reports hav e appeared of people reacting this w ay
a er having the ‘Covid v accine’. What do w e think is going to
happen as humanity has more and more of these ‘v accines’?
T enpenny said: ‘ All these pictures w e hav e seen with people with
these rashes … these w eepy rashes, big reactions on their arms and
things like that – it’ s an acute allergic reaction most likely to the
poly ethylene glycol that y ou’v e been previously primed and
sensitised to.’
Those who hav e not studied the conspiracy and its perpetrators at
length might think that making the population sensitiv e to PEG and
then pu ing it in these ‘v accines’ is just a coincidence. It is not. It is
instead testament to how carefully and coldly-planned current
ev ents hav e been and the scale of the conspiracy w e are dealing
with. T enpenny further explains that the ‘v accine’ mRNA procedure
can breach the blood-brain barrier which protects the brain from
toxins and other crap that will cause malfunction. In this case they
could make tw o proteins corrupt brain function to cause
Amy otrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) , a progressiv e nerv ous system
disease leading to loss of muscle control, and frontal lobe
degeneration – Alzheimer ’ s and dementia. Immunologist J. Bart
Classon published a paper connecting mRNA ‘v accines’ to priondisease which can lead to Alzheimer ’ s and other forms of
neurogenerativ e disease while others hav e pointed out the potential
to aﬀect the placenta in w ays that make w omen infertile. This will
become highly signiﬁcant in the next chapter when I will discuss
other aspects of this non-v accine that relate to its nanotechnology
and transmission from the injected to the uninjected.
Qualified in idiocy
T enpenny describes how research has conﬁrmed that these ‘v accine’-
generated antibodies can interact with a range of other tissues in the
body and a ack many other organs including the lungs. ‘This means
that if y ou hav e a hundred people standing in front of y ou that all
got this shot they could hav e a hundred diﬀerent symptoms.’
Any one really think that Cult gofers like the Queen, T ony Blair ,
Christopher Whi y , Anthony Fauci, and all the other psychopaths
hav e really had this ‘v accine’ in the pictures w e’v e seen? Not a
bloody chance. Why don’ t doctors all tell us about all these dangers
and consequences of the ‘Covid v accine’? Why instead do they
encourage and pressure patients to hav e the shot? Don’ t let’ s think
for a moment that doctors and medical staﬀ can’ t be stupid, lazy , and
psychopathic and that’ s without the ﬁnancial incentiv es to giv e the
jab. T enpenny again:
S o m e  p e o p l e  a r e  g o i n g  t o  d i e  f r o m  t h e  v a c c i n e  d i r e c t l y  b u t  a  l a r g e  n u m b e r  o f  p e o p l e  a r e
g o i n g  t o  s t a r t  t o  g e t  h o r r i b l y  s i c k  a n d  g e t  a l l  k i n d s  o f  a u t o i m m u n e  d i s e a s e s  4 2  d a y s  t o  m a y b e  a
y e a r  o u t .  W h a t  a r e  t h e y  g o i n g  t o  d o ,  t h e s e  s t u p i d  d o c t o r s  w h o  s a y ;  ‘ G o o d  f o r  y o u  f o r  g e t t i n g
t h a t  v a c c i n e . ’  W h a t  a r e  t h e y  g o i n g  t o  s a y ;  ‘ O h ,  i t  m u s t  b e  a  m u t a n t ,  w e  n e e d  t o  g i v e  a n  e x t r a
d o s e  o f  t h a t  v a c c i n e . ’
B e c a u s e  n o w  t h e  v a c c i n e ,  i n s t e a d  o f  o n e  d o s e  o r  t w o  d o s e s  w e  n e e d  t h r e e  o r  f o u r  b e c a u s e  t h e
s t u p i d  p h y s i c i a n s  a r e n ’ t  t a k i n g  t h e  t i m e  t o  l e a r n  a n y t h i n g  a b o u t  i t .  I f  I  c a n  l e a r n  t h i s  s i t t i n g  i n
m y  l i v i n g  r o o m  r e a d i n g  a  1 9  p a g e  p a p e r  a n d  s e v e r a l  o t h e r s  s o  c a n  t h e y .  T h e r e ’ s  n o t h i n g
s p e c i a l  a b o u t  m e ,  I  j u s t  t a k e  t h e  t i m e  t o  d o  i t .
Remember how Sara Kay at, the NHS and TV doctor , said that the
‘Covid v accine’ w ould ‘100 percent prev ent hospitalisation and
death’. Doctors can be idiots like ev ery other profession and theyshould not be w orshipped as infallible. They are not and far from it.
Behind many medical and scientiﬁc ‘experts’ lies an uninformed prat
trying to hide themselv es from y ou although in the ‘Covid’ era many
hav e failed to do so as with UK narrativ e-repeating ‘TV doctor ’
Hilary Jones. Pushing back against the minority of proper doctors
and scientists speaking out against the ‘v accine’ has been the entire
ediﬁce of the Cult global state in the form of gov ernments, medical
systems, corporations, mainstream media, Silicon V alley , and an
army of compliant doctors, medical staﬀ and scientists willing to say
anything for money and to enhance their careers by promoting the
party line. If y ou do that y ou are an ‘expert’ and if y ou w on’ t y ou are
an ‘anti-v axxer ’ and ‘Covidiot’. The pressure to be ‘v accinated’ is
incessant. W e hav e ev en had reports claiming that the ‘v accine’ can
help cure cancer and Alzheimer ’ s and make the lame w alk. I am
w aiting for the announcement that it can bring y ou coﬀee in the
morning and cook y our tea. Just as the symptoms of ‘Covid’ seem to
increase by the w eek so hav e the miracles of the ‘v accine’. American
supermarket giant Kroger Co. oﬀered nearly 500,000 employ ees in
35 states a $100 bonus for having the ‘v accine’ while donut chain
Krispy Kreme promised ‘v accinated’ customers a free glazed donut
ev ery day for the rest of 2021. Hav e y our DNA changed and y ou will
get a doughnut although w e might not hav e to giv e y ou them for
long. Such oﬀers and incentiv es conﬁrm the desperation.
P erhaps the w orse v accine-stunt of them all w as UK ‘Health’
Secretary Ma -the-prat Hancock on liv e TV a er w atching a clip of
someone being ‘v accinated’ when the roll-out began. Hancock faked
tears so badly it w as embarrassing. Brain-of-Britain Piers Morgan,
the lockdown-supporting, ‘v accine’ supporting, ‘v accine’ passport-
supporting, TV host play ed along with Hancock – ‘Y ou’ re quite
emotional about that’ he said in response to acting so atrocious it
w ould hav e been called out at a school nativity which will
presumably today include Mary and Jesus in masks, wise men
keeping their camels six feet apart, and shepherds under tent arrest.
System-serving Morgan tw eeted this: ‘Lov e the idea of covid v accine
passports for ev erywhere: ﬂights, restaurants, clubs, football, gyms,shops etc. It’ s time covid-denying, anti-v axxer loonies had their
bullsh*t bluﬀ called & bar themselv es from going anywhere that
responsible citizens go.’ If only I could aspire to his genius. T o think
that Morgan, who specialises in shouting ov er any one he disagrees
with, w as lauded as a free speech hero when he lost his job a er
storming oﬀ the set of his liv e show like a child throwing his dolly
out of the pram. If he is a free speech hero w e are in real trouble. I
hav e no idea what ‘bullsh*t’ means, by the w ay , the * throws me
completely .
The Cult is desperate to infuse its synthetic DNA-changing
concoction into ev ery one and has been using ev ery lie, trick and
intimidation to do so. The question of ‘ Why ?’ w e shall now address.ICHAPTER TEN
Human 2.0
I believe that at the end of the century the use of words and general
educated opinion will have altered so much that one will be able to
speak of machines thinking without expecting to be contradicted –
Alan Turing (1912-1954), the ‘Father of artificial intelligence‘
hav e been exposing for decades the plan to transform the human
body from a biological to a synthetic-biological state. The new
human that I will call Human 2.0 is planned to be connected to
artiﬁcial intelligence and a global AI ‘Smart Grid’ that w ould operate
as one global system in which AI w ould control ev erything from
y our fridge to y our heating system to y our car to y our mind.
Humans w ould no longer be ‘human’, but post-human and sub-
human, with their thinking and emotional processes replaced by AI.
What I said sounded crazy and bey ond science ﬁction and I could
understand that. T o any balanced, rational, mind it is  crazy . T oday ,
how ev er , that w orld is becoming reality and it puts the ‘Covid
v accine’ into its true context. Ray Kurzw eil is the ultra-Zionist
‘computer scientist, inv entor and futurist’ and co-founder of the
Singularity Univ ersity . Singularity refers to the merging of humans
with machines or ‘transhumanism’. Kurzw eil has said humanity
w ould be connected to the cyber ‘cloud’ in the period of the ev er -
recurring y ear of 2030:
Our thinking … will be a hybrid of biological and non-biological thinking … humans will be
able to extend their limitations and ‘think in the cloud’ … We’re going to put gateways to thecloud in our brains ... We’re going to gradually merge and enhance ourselves ... In my view,
that’s the nature of being human – we transcend our limitations. As the technology becomes
vastly superior to what we are then the small proportion that is still human gets smaller and
smaller and smaller until it’s just utterly negligible.
They are trying to sell this end-of-humanity-as-w e-know-it as the
next stage of ‘ev olution’ when w e become super -human and ‘like the
gods’. They are lying to y ou. Shocked, eh? The population, and again
especially the y oung, hav e been manipulated into addiction to
technologies designed to enslav e them for life. First they induced an
addiction to smartphones (holdables); next they mov ed to
technology on the body (w earables); and then began the inv asion of
the body (implantables). I w arned w ay back about the plan for
microchipped people and w e are now entering that era. W e should
not be div erted into thinking that this refers only to chips w e can see.
Most important are the nanochips known as smart dust, neural dust
and nanobots which are far too small to be seen by the human ey e.
Nanotechnology is ev erywhere, increasingly in food products, and
released into the atmosphere by the geoengineering of the skies
funded by Bill Gates to ‘shut out the Sun’ and ‘sav e the planet from
global w arming’. Gates has been funding a project to spray millions
of tonnes of chalk (calcium carbonate) into the stratosphere ov er
Sw eden to ‘dim the Sun’ and cool the Earth. Scientists w arned the
mov e could be disastrous for w eather systems in w ays no one can
predict and opposition led to the Sw edish space agency announcing
that the ‘experiment’ w ould not be happening as planned in the
summer of 2021; but it shows where the Cult is going with dimming
the impact of the Sun and there’ s an associated plan to change the
planet’ s atmosphere. Who giv es psychopath Gates the right to
dictate to the entire human race and dismantle planetary systems?
The w orld will not be safe while this man is at large.
The global w arming hoax has made the Sun, like the gas of life,
something to fear when both are essential to good health and human
surviv al (more inv ersion). The body transforms sunlight into vital
vitamin D through a process inv olving … cholesterol . This is the
cholesterol w e are also told to fear . W e are urged to take Big Pharmastatin drugs to reduce cholesterol and it’ s all systematic. Reducing
cholesterol means reducing vitamin D uptake with all the multiple
health problems that will cause. At least if y ou take statins long term
it sav es the gov ernment from having to pay y ou a pension. The
deliv ery system to block sunlight is widely referred to as chemtrails
although these hav e a much deeper agenda, too. They appear at ﬁrst
to be contrails or condensation trails streaming from aircra  into
cold air at high altitudes. Contrails disperse v ery quickly while
chemtrails do not and spread out across the sky before ev entually
their content falls to earth. Many times I hav e w atched aircra  cross-
cross a clear blue sky releasing chemtrails until it looks like a cloudy
day . Chemtrails contain many things harmful to humans and the
natural w orld including toxic heavy metals, aluminium (see
Alzheimer ’ s) and nanotechnology . Ray Kurzw eil rev eals the reason
without actually saying so: ‘Nanobots will infuse all the ma er
around us with information. Rocks, trees, ev erything will become
these intelligent creatures.’ How do y ou deliv er that? From the sky .
Self-replicating nanobots w ould connect ev erything to the Smart
Grid. The phenomenon of Morgellons disease began in the chemtrail
era and the correlation has led to it being dubbed the ‘chemtrail
disease’. Self-replicating ﬁbres appear in the body that can be pulled
out through the skin. Morgellons ﬁbres continue to grow outside the
body and hav e a form of artiﬁcial intelligence. I cov er this at greater
length in Phantom Self .
‘Vaccine’ operating system
‘Covid v accines’ with their self-replicating synthetic material are also
designed to make the connection betw een humanity and Kurzw eil’ s
‘cloud’. American doctor and dedicated campaigner for truth, Carrie
Madej, an Internal Medicine Specialist in Georgia with more than 20
y ears medical experience, has highlighted the nanotechnology aspect
of the fake ‘v accines’. She explains how one of the components in at
least the Moderna and Pﬁzer synthetic potions are ‘lipid
nanoparticles’ which are ‘like li le tiny computer bits’ – a ‘sci-ﬁ
substance’ known as nanobots and hydrogel which can be ‘triggeredat any moment to deliv er its payload’ and act as ‘biosensors’. The
synthetic substance had ‘the ability to accumulate data from y our
body like y our breathing, y our respiration, thoughts and emotions,
all kind of things’ and each syringe could carry a million  nanobots:
This substance because it’s like little bits of computers in your body, crazy, but it’s true, it can
do that, [and] obviously has the ability to act through Wi-Fi. It can receive and transmit
energy, messages, frequencies or impulses. That issue has never been addressed by these
companies. What does that do to the human?
Just imagine getting this substance in you and it can react to things all around you, the 5G,
your smart device, your phones, what is happening with that? What if something is triggering
it, too, like an impulse, a frequency? We have something completely foreign in the human
body.
Madej said her research rev ealed that electromagnetic (EMF)
frequencies emi ed by phones and other devices had increased
dramatically in the same period of the ‘v accine’ rollout and she w as
seeing more people with radiation problems as 5G and other
electromagnetic technology w as expanded and introduced to schools
and hospitals. She said she w as ‘ﬂoored with the EMF coming oﬀ ’
the devices she checked. All this makes total sense and syncs with
my own w ork of decades when y ou think that Moderna refers in
documents to its mRNA ‘v accine’ as an ‘operating system’:
Recognizing the broad potential of mRNA science, we set out to create an mRNA technology
platform that functions very much like an operating system on a computer. It is designed so
that it can plug and play interchangeably with different programs. In our case, the ‘program’
or ‘app’ is our mRNA drug – the unique mRNA sequence that codes for a protein …
… Our MRNA Medicines – ‘The ‘Software Of Life’: When we have a concept for a new
mRNA medicine and begin research, fundamental components are already in place.
Generally, the only thing that changes from one potential mRNA medicine to another is the
coding region – the actual genetic code that instructs ribosomes to make protein. Utilizing
these instruction sets gives our investigational mRNA medicines a software-like quality. We
also have the ability to combine different mRNA sequences encoding for different proteins in
a single mRNA investigational medicine.Who needs a real ‘virus’ when y ou can create a computer v ersion to
justify infusing y our operating system into the entire human race on
the road to making living, breathing people into cyborgs? What is
missed with the ‘v accines’ is the digital  connection betw een synthetic
material and the body that I highlighted earlier with the study that
hacked a computer with human DNA. On one lev el the body is
digital, based on mathematical codes, and I’ll hav e more about that
in the next chapter . Those who ridiculously claim that mRNA
‘v accines’ are not designed to change human genetics should explain
the w ords of Dr T al Zaks, chief medical oﬃcer at Moderna, in a 2017
TED talk. He said that ov er the last 30 y ears ‘w e’v e been living this
phenomenal digital scientiﬁc rev olution, and I’ m here today to tell
y ou, that w e are actually hacking the software of life , and that it’ s
changing the w ay w e think about prev ention and treatment of
disease’:
In every cell there’s this thing called messenger RNA, or mRNA for short, that transmits the
critical information from the DNA in our genes to the protein, which is really the stuff we’re
all made out of. This is the critical information that determines what the cell will do. So we
think about it as an operating system. So if you could change that, if you could introduce a
line of code, or change a line of code, it turns out, that has profound implications for
everything, from the flu to cancer.
Zaks should more accurately hav e said that this has profound
implications for the human genetic code and the nature of DNA.
Communications within the body go both w ays and not only one.
But, hey , no, the ‘Covid v accine’ will not aﬀect y our genetics. Cult
fact-checkers say so ev en though the man who helped to dev elop the
mRNA technique says that it does. Zaks said in 2017:
If you think about what it is we’re trying to do. We’ve taken information and our
understanding of that information and how that information is transmitted in a cell, and we’ve
taken our understanding of medicine and how to make drugs, and we’re fusing the two. We
think of it as information therapy.
I hav e been writing for decades that the body is an information
ﬁeld communicating with itself and the wider w orld. This is whyradiation which is information can change the information ﬁeld of
body and mind through phenomena like 5G and change their nature
and function. ‘Information therapy’ means to change the body’ s
information ﬁeld and change the w ay it operates. DNA is a receiv er -
transmi er of information and can be mutated by information like
mRNA synthetic messaging. T echnology to do this has been ready
and w aiting in the underground bases and other secret projects to be
rolled out when the ‘Covid’ hoax w as play ed. ‘T rials’ of such short
and irrelev ant duration w ere only for public consumption. When
they say the ‘v accine’ is ‘experimental’ that is not true. It may appear
to be ‘experimental’ to those who don’ t know what’ s going on, but
the trials hav e already been done to ensure the Cult gets the result it
desires. Zaks said that it took decades to sequence the human
genome, completed in 2003, but now they could do it in a w eek. By
‘they’ he means scientists operating in the public domain. In the
secret projects they w ere sequencing the genome in a w eek long
before ev en 2003.
Deluge of mRNA
Highly signiﬁcantly the Moderna document says the guiding
premise is that if using mRNA as a medicine w orks for one disease
then it should w ork for many diseases. They w ere lev eraging the
ﬂexibility aﬀorded by their platform and the fundamental role
mRNA plays in protein synthesis to pursue mRNA medicines for a
broad spectrum of diseases. Moderna is conﬁrming what I w as
saying through 2020 that multiple ‘v accines’ w ere planned for
‘Covid’ (and later inv ented ‘v ariants’) and that previous v accines
w ould be conv erted to the mRNA system to infuse the body with
massiv e amounts of genetically-manipulating synthetic material to
secure a transformation to a synthetic-biological state. The ‘v accines’
are designed to kill stunning numbers as part of the long-exposed
Cult depopulation agenda and transform the rest. Giv en this is the
goal y ou can appreciate why there is such hysterical demand for
ev ery human to be ‘v accinated’ for an alleged ‘disease’ that has an
estimated ‘infection’ to ‘death’ ratio of 0.23-0.15 percent. As I write•
•
•children are being giv en the ‘v accine’ in trials (their parents are a
disgrace) and ev er -y ounger people are being oﬀered the v accine for
a ‘virus’ that ev en if y ou believ e it exists has virtually zero chance of
harming them. Horriﬁc eﬀects of the ‘trials’ on a 12-y ear -old girl
w ere rev ealed by a family member to be serious brain and gastric
problems that included a bow el obstruction and the inability to
sw allow liquids or solids. She w as unable to eat or drink without
throwing up, had extreme pain in her back, neck and abdomen, and
w as paralysed from the w aist down which stopped her urinating
unaided. When the girl w as ﬁrst taken to hospital doctors said it w as
all in her mind. She w as signed up for the ‘trial’ by her parents for
whom no w ords suﬃce. None of this ‘Covid v accine’ insanity makes
any sense unless y ou see what the ‘v accine’ really is – a body-
changer . Synthetic biology or ‘SynBio’ is a fast-emerging and
expanding scientiﬁc discipline which includes ev erything from
genetic and molecular engineering to electrical and computer
engineering. Synthetic biology is deﬁned in these w ays:
A multidisciplinary area of research that seeks to create new
biological parts, devices, and systems, or to redesign systems that
are already found in nature.
The use of a mixture of physical engineering and genetic
engineering to create new (and therefore synthetic) life forms.
An emerging ﬁeld of research that aims to combine the
knowledge and methods of biology , engineering and related
disciplines in the design of chemically-synthesized DNA to create
organisms with nov el or enhanced characteristics and traits
(synthetic organisms including humans).
W e now hav e synthetic blood, skin, organs and limbs being
dev eloped along with synthetic body parts produced by 3D printers.
These are all elements of the synthetic human programme and this
comment by Kurzw eil’ s co-founder of the Singularity Univ ersity ,P eter Diamandis, can be seen in a whole new light with the ‘Covid’
hoax and the sanctions against those that refuse the ‘v accine’:
Anybody who is going to be resisting the progress forward [to transhumanism] is going to be
resisting evolution and, fundamentally, they will die out. It’s not a matter of whether it’s good
or bad. It’s going to happen.
‘Resisting ev olution’? What absolute bollocks. The arrogance of these
people is without limit. His ‘it’ s going to happen’ mantra is another
w ay of saying ‘resistance is futile’ to break the spirit of those pushing
back and w e must not fall for it. Ge ing this genetically-
transforming ‘v accine’ into ev ery one is crucial to the Cult plan for
total control and the desperation to achiev e that is clear for any one
to see. V accine passports are a major factor in this and they , too, are a
form of resistance is futile. It’ s NOT . The paper funded by the
Rockefeller Foundation for the 2013 ‘health conference’ in China
said:
We will interact more with artificial intelligence. The use of robotics, bio-engineering to
augment human functioning is already well underway and will advance. Re-engineering of
humans into potentially separate and unequal forms through genetic engineering or mixed
human-robots raises debates on ethics and equality.
A new demography is projected to emerge after 2030 [that year again] of technologies
(robotics, genetic engineering, nanotechnology) producing robots, engineered organisms,
‘nanobots’ and artificial intelligence (AI) that can self-replicate. Debates will grow on the
implications of an impending reality of human designed life.
What is happening today is so long planned. The w orld army
enforcing the will of the w orld gov ernment is intended to be a robot
army , not a human one. T oday’ s military and its technologically
‘enhanced’ troops, pilotless planes and driv erless v ehicles are just
stepping stones to that end. Human soldiers are used as Cult fodder
and its time they w oke up to that and w orked for the freedom of the
population instead of their own destruction and their family’ s
destruction – the same with the police. Join us and let’ s sort this out.
The phenomenon of enforce my own destruction is widespread in
the ‘Covid’ era with W oker ‘luvvies’ in the acting and entertainmentindustries supporting ‘Covid’ rules which hav e destroy ed their
profession and the same with those among the public who put signs
on the doors of their businesses ‘closed due to Covid – stay safe’
when many will nev er reopen. It’ s a form of masochism and most
certainly insanity .
Transgender = transhumanism
When something explodes out of nowhere and is suddenly
ev erywhere it is alw ays the Cult agenda and so it is with the tidal
w av e of claims and demands that hav e inﬁltrated ev ery aspect of
society under the heading of ‘transgenderism’. The term ‘trans’ is so
‘in’ and this is the dictionary deﬁnition:
A prefix meaning ‘across’, ’through’, occurring … in loanwords from Latin, used in particular
for denoting movement or conveyance from place to place (transfer; transmit; transplant) or
complete change (transform; transmute), or to form adjectives meaning ’crossing’, ‘on the
other side of’, or ‘going beyond’ the place named (transmontane; transnational; trans-
Siberian).
T ransgender means to go bey ond gender and transhuman means
to go bey ond human. Both are aspects of the Cult plan to transform
the human body to a synthetic state with no gender . Human 2.0 is not
designed to procreate and w ould be produced technologically with
no need for parents. The new human w ould mean the end of parents
and so men, and increasingly w omen, are being targeted for the
deletion of their rights and status. P arental rights are disappearing at
an ev er -quickening speed for the same reason. The new human
w ould hav e no need for men or w omen when there is no procreation
and no gender . P erhaps the transgender mov ement that appears to
be in a permanent state of frenzy might now contemplate on how it
is being used. This w as nev er about transgender rights which are
only the interim excuse for confusing gender , particularly in the
y oung, on the road to fusing  gender . T ransgender activism is not an
end; it is a means  to an end. W e see again the technique of creativ e
destruction in which y ou destroy the status quo to ‘build back be er ’
in the form that y ou w ant. The gender status quo had to bedestroy ed by persuading the Cult-created W oke mentality to believ e
that y ou can hav e 100 genders or more. A programme for 9 to 12
y ear olds produced by the Cult-owned BBC promoted the 100
genders narrativ e. The v ery idea may be the most monumental
nonsense, but it is not what is true that counts, only what y ou can
make people believe  is true. Once the gender of 2 + 2 = 4 has been
dismantled through indoctrination, intimidation and 2 + 2 = 5 then
the new no-gender normal can take its place with Human 2.0.
Aldous Huxley rev ealed the plan in his prophetic Brave New World  in
1932:
Natural reproduction has been done away with and children are created, decanted’, and
raised in ‘hatcheries and conditioning centres’. From birth, people are genetically designed to
fit into one of five castes, which are further split into ‘Plus’ and ‘Minus’ members and designed
to fulfil predetermined positions within the social and economic strata of the World State.
How could Huxley know this in 1932? For the same reason George
Orw ell knew about the Big Brother state in 1948, Cult insiders I hav e
quoted knew about it in 1969, and I hav e known about it since the
early 1990s. If y ou are connected to the Cult or y ou w ork y our balls
oﬀ to uncov er the plan y ou can predict the future. The process is
simple. If there is a plan for the w orld and nothing interv enes to stop
it then it will happen. Thus if y ou communicate the plan ahead of
time y ou are perceiv ed to hav e predicted the future, but y ou hav en’ t.
Y ou hav e rev ealed the plan which without interv ention will become
the human future. The whole reason I hav e done what I hav e is to
alert enough people to inspire an interv ention and maybe at last that
time has come with the Cult and its intentions now so obvious to
any one with a brain in w orking order .
The future is here
T echnological w ombs that Huxley described to replace parent
procreation are already being dev eloped and they are only the
projects w e know about in the public arena. Israeli scientists told The
Times of Israel  in March, 2021, that they hav e grown 250-cell embry osinto mouse foetuses with fully formed organs using artiﬁcial w ombs
in a dev elopment they say could pav e the w ay for gestating humans
outside the w omb. Professor Jacob Hanna of the W eizmann Institute
of Science said:
We took mouse embryos from the mother at day five of development, when they are just of
250 cells, and had them in the incubator from day five until day 11, by which point they had
grown all their organs.
By day 11 they make their own blood and have a beating heart, a fully developed brain.
Anybody would look at them and say, ‘this is clearly a mouse foetus with all the
characteristics of a mouse.’ It’s gone from being a ball of cells to being an advanced foetus.
A special liquid is used to nourish embry o cells in a laboratory
dish and they ﬂoat on the liquid to duplicate the ﬁrst stage of
embry onic dev elopment. The incubator creates all the right
conditions for its dev elopment, Hanna said. The liquid giv es the
embry o ‘all the nutrients, hormones and sugars they need’ along
with a custom-made electronic incubator which controls gas
concentration, pressure and temperature. The cu ing-edge in the
underground bases and other secret locations will be light y ears
ahead of that, how ev er , and this w as reported by the London
Guardian  in 2017:
We are approaching a biotechnological breakthrough. Ectogenesis, the invention of a
complete external womb, could completely change the nature of human reproduction. In
April this year, researchers at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia announced their
development of an artificial womb.
The article w as headed ‘ Artiﬁcial w ombs could soon be a reality .
What will this mean for w omen?’ What w ould it mean for children is
an ev en bigger question. No mother to bond with only a machine in
preparation for a life of soulless interaction and control in a w orld
gov erned by machines (see the Matrix  movies). Now observ e the
calculated manipulations of the ‘Covid’ hoax as human interaction
and w armth has been curtailed by distancing, isolation and fear with
people communicating via machines on a scale nev er seen before.These are all dots in the same picture as are all the personal
assistants, gadgets and children’ s toys through which kids and
adults communicate with AI as if it is human. The AI ‘v oice’ on Sat-
Nav should be included. All these things are psychological
preparation for the Cult endgame. Before y ou can make a physical
connection with AI y ou hav e to make a psychological connection
and that is what people are being conditioned to do with this ev er
gathering human-AI interaction. Movies and TV programmes
depicting the transhuman, robot dystopia relate to a phenomenon
known as ‘pre-emptiv e programming’ in which the w orld that is
planned is portray ed ev erywhere in movies, TV and adv ertising.
This is conditioning the conscious and subconscious mind to become
familiar with the planned reality to dilute resistance when it
happens for real. What w ould hav e been a shock such is the change
is made less so. W e hav e y oung children put on the road to
transgender transition surgery with puberty blocking drugs at an
age when they could nev er be able to make those life-changing
decisions.
Rachel Levine, a professor of paediatrics and psychiatry who
believ es in treating children this w ay , became America’ s highest-
ranked openly-transgender oﬃcial when she w as conﬁrmed as US
Assistant Secretary at the Department of Health and Human
Services a er being nominated by Joe Biden (the Cult). Activists and
gov ernments press for laws to deny parents a say in their children’ s
transition process so the kids can be isolated and manipulated into
agreeing to irrev ersible medical procedures. A Canadian father
Robert Hoogland w as denied bail by the V ancouv er Supreme Court
in 2021 and remained in jail for breaching a court order that he stay
silent ov er his y oung teenage daughter , a minor , who w as being
oﬀered life-changing hormone therapy without parental consent. At
the age of 12 the girl’ s ‘school counsellor ’ said she may be
transgender , referred her to a doctor and told the school to treat her
like a boy . This is another example of state-serving schools imposing
ev er more control ov er children’ s liv es while parents hav e ev er less.Contemptible and extreme child abuse is happening all ov er the
w orld as the Cult gender -fusion operation goes into w arp-speed.
Why the war on men – and now women?
The question about what artiﬁcial w ombs mean for w omen should
rightly be asked. The answ er can be seen in the deletion of w omen’ s
rights inv olving sport, changing rooms, toilets and status in fav our
of people in male bodies claiming to identify as w omen. I can
identify as a mountain climber , but it doesn’ t mean I can climb a
mountain any more than a biological man can be a biological
w oman. T o believ e so is a triumph of belief ov er factual reality which
is the v ery perceptual basis of ev erything W oke. W omen’ s sport is
being destroy ed by allowing those with male bodies who say they
identify as female to ‘compete’ with girls and w omen. Male body
‘w omen’ dominate ‘w omen’ s’ competition with their greater muscle
mass, bone density , strength and speed. W ith that disadv antage
sport for w omen loses all meaning. T o put this in perspectiv e nearly
300 American high school boys can run faster than the quickest
w oman sprinter in the w orld. W omen are seeing their previously
protected spaces inv aded by male bodies simply because they claim
to identify as w omen. That’ s all they need to do to access all w omen’ s
spaces and activities under the Biden ‘Equality Act’ that destroys
equality for w omen with the usual Orw ellian W oke inv ersion. Male
sex oﬀenders hav e already commi ed rapes in w omen’ s prisons a er
claiming to identify as w omen to get them transferred. Does this not
ma er to the W oke ‘equality’ hypocrites? Not in the least. What
ma ers to Cult manipulators and funders behind transgender
activists is to adv ance gender fusion on the w ay to the no-gender
‘human’. When y ou are seeking to impose transparent nonsense like
this, or the ‘Covid’ hoax, the only w ay the nonsense can prev ail is
through censorship and intimidation of dissenters, deletion of
factual information, and programming of the unquestioning,
bewildered and naiv e. Y ou don’ t hav e to scan the w orld for long to
see that all these things are happening.Many w omen’ s rights organisations hav e realised that rights and
status which took such a long time to secure are being eroded and
that it is systematic. Kara Dansky of the global W omen’ s Human
Rights Campaign said that Biden’ s transgender executiv e order
immediately he took oﬃce, subsequent orders, and Equality Act
legislation that follow ed ‘seek to erase w omen and girls in the law as
a category’. Exactly . I said during the long ago-started w ar on men
(in which many w omen play a crucial part) that this w as going to
turn into a w ar on them. The Cult is phasing out both  male and
female genders. T o get aw ay with that they are brought into conﬂict
so they are busy ﬁghting each other while the Cult completes the job
with no unity of response. Unity , people, unity . W e need unity
ev erywhere. T ransgender is the only show in town as the big step
tow ards the no-gender human. It’ s not about rights for transgender
people and nev er has been. W oke political correctness is deleting
w ords relating to genders to the same end. W okers believ e this is to
be ‘inclusiv e’ when the opposite is true. They are deleting w ords
describing gender because gender itself  is being deleted by Human
2.0. T erms like ‘man’, ‘w oman’, ‘mother ’ and ‘father ’ are being
deleted in the univ ersities and other institutions to be replaced by
the no -gender , not trans-gender , ‘individuals’ and ‘guardians’.
W omen’ s rights campaigner Maria Keﬄer of P artners for Ethical
Care said: ‘Children are being taught from kindergarten upw ard that
some boys hav e a v agina, some girls hav e a penis, and that kids can
be any gender they w ant to be.’ Do w e really believ e that suddenly
countries all ov er the w orld at the same time had the idea of having
drag queens go into schools or read transgender stories to v ery
y oung children in the local library? It’ s coldly-calculated confusion
of gender on the w ay to the fusion of gender . Suzanne V ierling, a
psychologist from Southern California, made another important
point:
Yesterday’s slave woman who endured gynecological medical experiments is today’s girl-
child being butchered in a booming gender-transitioning sector. Ovaries removed, pushing her
into menopause and osteoporosis, uncharted territory, and parents’ rights and authority
decimated.The erosion of parental rights is a common theme in line with the
Cult plans to erase the v ery concept of parents and ‘ov aries remov ed,
pushing her into menopause’ means what? Those born female lose
the ability to hav e children – another w ay to discontinue humanity
as w e know it.
Eliminating Human 1.0 (before our very eyes)
T o pav e the w ay for Human 2.0 y ou must phase out Human 1.0. This
is happening through plummeting sperm counts and making
w omen infertile through an onslaught of chemicals, radiation
(including smartphones in pockets of men) and mRNA ‘v accines’.
Common agriculture pesticides are also having a dev astating impact
on human fertility . I hav e been tracking collapsing sperm counts in
the books for a long time and in 2021 came a book by fertility
scientist and reproductiv e epidemiologist Shanna Sw an, Count
Down: How Our Modern World Is Threatening Sperm Counts, Altering
Male and Female Reproductive Development and Imperiling the Future of
the Human Race . She reports how the global fertility rate dropped by
half  betw een 1960 and 2016 with America’ s birth rate 16 percent
below where it needs to be to sustain the population. W omen are
experiencing declining egg quality , more miscarriages, and more
couples suﬀer from infertility . Other ﬁndings w ere an increase in
erectile dysfunction, infant boys dev eloping more genital
abnormalities, male problems with conception, and plunging lev els
of the male hormone testosterone which w ould explain why so
many men hav e lost their backbone and masculinity . This has been
v ery evident during the ‘Covid’ hoax when w omen hav e been
prominent among the Pushbackers and big strapping blokes hav e
bow ed their heads, cov ered their faces with a nappy and quietly
submi ed. Mind control expert Cathy O’Brien also points to how
global education introduced the concept of ‘w e’ re all winners’ in
sport and classrooms: ‘Competition w as defused, and it in turn
defused a sense of ﬁghting back.’ This is another v ersion of the
‘equity’ doctrine in which y ou driv e down rather than raise up.
What a contrast in Cult-controlled China with its global ambitionswhere the gov ernment published plans in January , 2021, to ‘cultiv ate
masculinity’ in boys from kindergarten through to high school in the
face of a ‘masculinity crisis’. A gov ernment adviser said boys w ould
be soon become ‘delicate, timid and eﬀeminate’ unless action w as
taken. Don’ t expect any similar policy in the targeted W est. A 2006
study show ed that a 65-y ear -old man in 2002 had testosterone lev els
15 percent  low er than a 65-y ear -old man in 1987 while a 2020 study
found a similar story with y oung adults and adolescents. Men are
ge ing prescriptions for testosterone replacement therapy which
causes an ev en greater drop in sperm count with up to 99 percent
seeing sperm counts drop to zero during the treatment. More sperm
is defectiv e and malfunctioning with some having tw o heads or not
pursuing an egg.
A class of synthetic  chemicals known as phthalates are being
blamed for the decline. These are found ev erywhere in plastics,
shampoos, cosmetics, furniture, ﬂame retardants, personal care
products, pesticides, canned foods and ev en receipts. Why till
receipts? Ev ery one touches them. Let no one delude themselv es that
all this is not systematic to adv ance the long-time agenda for human
body transformation. Phthalates mimic hormones and disrupt the
hormone balance causing testosterone to fall and genital birth
defects in male infants. Animals and ﬁsh hav e been aﬀected in the
same w ay due to phthalates and other toxins in riv ers. When ﬁsh
turn gay or change sex through chemicals in riv ers and streams it is
a pointer to why there has been such an increase in gay people and
the sexually confused. It doesn’ t ma er to me what sexuality people
choose to be, but if it’ s being aﬀected by chemical pollution and
consumption then w e need to know . Does any one really think that
this is not connected to the transgender agenda, the w ar on men and
the condemnation of male ‘toxic masculinity’? Y ou w atch this being
follow ed by ‘toxic femininity’. It’ s already happening. When
breastfeeding becomes ‘chest-feeding’, pregnant w omen become
pregnant people along with all the other W oke claptrap y ou know
that the w orld is going insane and there’ s a Cult scam in progress.
T ransgender activists are promoting the Cult agenda while Cultbillionaires support and fund the insanity as they laugh themselv es
to sleep at the sheer stupidity for which humans must be infamous
in galaxies far , far aw ay .
‘Covid vaccines’ and female infertility
W e can now see why the ‘v accine’ has been connected to potential
infertility in w omen. Dr Michael Y eadon, former V ice President and
Chief Scientiﬁc Advisor at Pﬁzer , and Dr W olfgang W odarg in
Germany , ﬁled a petition with the European Medicines Agency in
December , 2020, urging them to stop trials for the Pﬁzer/BioNT ech
shot and all other mRNA trials until further studies had been done.
They w ere particularly concerned about possible eﬀects on fertility
with ‘v accine’-produced antibodies a acking the protein Syncytin-1
which is responsible for dev eloping the placenta. The result w ould
be infertility ‘of indeﬁnite duration’ in w omen who hav e the
‘v accine’ with the placenta failing to form. Section 10.4.2 of the
Pﬁzer/BioNT ech trial protocol says that pregnant w omen or those
who might become so should not hav e mRNA shots. Section 10.4
w arns men taking mRNA shots to ‘be abstinent from heterosexual
intercourse’ and not to donate sperm. The UK gov ernment said that
it did not know  if the mRNA procedure had an eﬀect on fertility . Did
not know?  These people hav e to go to jail. UK gov ernment advice did
not recommend at the start that pregnant w omen had the shot and
said they should av oid pregnancy for at least tw o months a er
‘v accination’. The ‘advice’ w as later updated to pregnant w omen
should only hav e the ‘v accine’ if the beneﬁts outw eighed the risks to
mother and foetus. What the hell is that supposed to mean? Then
‘spontaneous abortions’ began to appear and rapidly increase on the
adv erse reaction reporting schemes which include only a fraction of
adv erse reactions. Thousands and ev er -growing numbers of
‘v accinated’ w omen are describing changes to their menstrual cycle
with heavier blood ﬂow , irregular periods and menstruating again
a er going through the menopause – all links to reproduction
eﬀects. W omen are passing blood clots and the lining of their uterus
while men report erectile dysfunction and blood eﬀects. Mostsigniﬁcantly of all un v accinated w omen began to report similar
menstrual changes a er interaction with ‘vaccinated’  people and men
and children w ere also aﬀected with bleeding noses, blood clots and
other conditions. ‘Shedding’ is when v accinated people can emit the
content of a v accine to aﬀect the unv accinated, but this is diﬀerent.
‘V accinated’ people w ere not shedding a ‘liv e virus’ allegedly in
‘v accines’ as before because the fake ‘Covid v accines’ inv olv e
synthetic material and other toxicity . Doctors exposing what is
happening prefer the term ‘transmission’ to shedding. Somehow
those that hav e had the shots are transmi ing eﬀects to those that
hav en’ t. Dr Carrie Madej said the nano-content of the ‘v accines’ can
‘act like an antenna’ to others around them which ﬁts perfectly with
my own conclusions. This ‘v accine’ transmission phenomenon w as
becoming known as the book w ent into production and I deal with
this further in the P ostscript.
V accine eﬀects on sterility are w ell known. The W orld Health
Organization w as accused in 2014 of sterilising millions of w omen in
Keny a with the evidence conﬁrmed by the content of the v accines
inv olv ed. The same WHO behind the ‘Covid’ hoax admi ed its
inv olv ement for more than ten y ears with the v accine programme.
Other countries made similar claims. Charges w ere lodged by
T anzania, Nicaragua, Mexico, and the Philippines. The Gardasil
v accine claimed to protect against a genital ‘virus’ known as HPV
has also been linked to infertility . Big Pharma and the WHO (same
thing) are criminal and satanic entities. Then there’ s the Bill Gates
Foundation which is connected through funding and shared
interests with 20 pharmaceutical giants and laboratories. He stands
accused of directing the policy of United Nations Children’ s Fund
(UNICEF), v accine alliance GA VI, and other groupings, to adv ance
the v accine agenda and silence opposition at great cost to w omen
and children. At the same time Gates w ants to reduce the global
population. Coincidence?
Great Reset = Smart Grid = new humanThe Cult agenda I hav e been exposing for 30 y ears is now being
openly promoted by Cult assets like Gates and Klaus Schw ab of the
W orld Economic Forum under code-terms like the ‘Great Reset’,
‘Build Back Be er ’ and ‘a rare but narrow window of opportunity to
reﬂect, reimagine, and reset our w orld’. What provided this ‘rare but
narrow window of opportunity’? The ‘Covid’ hoax did. Who created
that? They  did. My books from not that long ago w arned about the
planned ‘Internet of Things’ (IoT) and its implications for human
freedom. This w as the plan to connect all technology to the Internet
and artiﬁcial intelligence and today w e are w ay down that road with
an estimated 36 billion devices connected to the W orld W ide W eb
and that ﬁgure is projected to be 76 billion by 2025. I further w arned
that the Cult planned to go bey ond that to the Internet of Everything
when the human brain w as connected via AI to the Internet and
Kurzw eil’ s ‘cloud’. Now w e hav e Cult operativ es like Schw ab calling
for precisely that under the term ‘Internet of Bodies’, a fusion of the
physical, digital and biological into one centrally-controlled Smart
Grid system which the Cult refers to as the ‘Fourth Industrial
Rev olution’. They talk about the ‘biological’, but they really mean
the synthetic-biological which is required to fully integrate the
human body and brain into the Smart Grid and artiﬁcial intelligence
planned to replace the human mind. W e hav e ev erything being
synthetically manipulated including the natural w orld through
GMO and smart dust, the food w e eat and the human body itself
with synthetic ‘v accines’. I said in The Answer  that w e w ould see the
Cult push for synthetic meat to replace animals and in February ,
2021, the so predictable psychopath Bill Gates called for the
introduction of synthetic meat to sav e us all from ‘climate change’.
The climate hoax just keeps on giving like the ‘Covid’ hoax. The w ar
on meat by v egan activists is a carbon (oops, sorry) copy of the
manipulation of transgender activists. They hav e no idea (except
their inner core) that they are being used to promote and impose the
agenda of the Cult or that they are only the vehicle  and not the reason .
This is not to say those who choose not to eat meat shouldn’ t be
respected and supported in that right, but there are ulterior motiv es•
•
•for those in pow er . A Forbes  article in December , 2019, highlighted
the plan so belov ed of Schw ab and the Cult under the heading:
‘What Is The Internet of Bodies? And How Is It Changing Our
W orld?’ The article said the human body is the latest data platform
(remember ‘our v accine is an operating system’). Forbes  described
the plan v ery accurately and the w ords could hav e come straight out
of my books from long before:
The Internet of Bodies (IoB) is an extension of the IoT and basically connects the human body
to a network through devices that are ingested, implanted, or connected to the body in some
way. Once connected, data can be exchanged, and the body and device can be remotely
monitored and controlled.
They w ere really describing a human hiv e mind with human
perception centrally-dictated via an AI connection as w ell as
allowing people to be ‘remotely monitored and controlled’.
Ev erything from a fridge to a human mind could be directed from a
central point by these insane psychopaths and ‘Covid v accines’ are
crucial to this. Forbes explained the process I mentioned earlier of
holdable and w earable technology follow ed by implantable. The
article said there w ere three generations of the Internet of Bodies that
include:
Body external: These are w earable devices such as Apple W atches
or Fitbits that can monitor our health.
Body internal: These include pacemakers, cochlear implants, and
digital pills that go inside our bodies to monitor or control v arious
aspects of health.
Body embedded: The third generation of the Internet of Bodies is
embedded technology where technology and the human body are
melded together and hav e a real-time connection to a remote
machine.Forbes  noted the dev elopment of the Brain Computer Interface (BCI)
which merges the brain with an external device for monitoring and
controlling in real-time. ‘The ultimate goal is to help restore function
to individuals with disabilities by using brain signals rather than
conv entional neuromuscular pathw ays.’ Oh, do fuck oﬀ. The goal of
brain interface technology is controlling human thought and
emotion from the central point in a hiv e mind serving its masters
wishes. Many people are now agreeing to be chipped to open doors
without a key . Y ou can recognise them because they’ll be w earing a
mask, social distancing and lining up for the ‘v accine’. The Cult
plans a Great Reset money system a er they hav e completed the
demolition of the global economy in which ‘money’ will be
exchanged through communication with body operating systems.
Rand Corporation, a Cult-owned think tank, said of the Internet of
Bodies or IoB:
Internet of Bodies technologies fall under the broader IoT umbrella. But as the name suggests,
IoB devices introduce an even more intimate interplay between humans and gadgets. IoB
devices monitor the human body, collect health metrics and other personal information, and
transmit those data over the Internet. Many devices, such as fitness trackers, are already in use
… IoB devices … and those in development can track, record, and store users’ whereabouts,
bodily functions, and what they see, hear, and even think.
Schw ab’ s W orld Economic Forum, a long-winded w ay of saying
‘fascism’ or ‘the Cult’, has gone full-on with the Internet of Bodies in
the ‘Covid’ era. ‘W e’ re entering the era of the Internet of Bodies’, it
declared, ‘collecting our physical data via a range of devices that can
be implanted, sw allow ed or w orn’. The result w ould be a huge
amount of health-related data that could improv e human w ellbeing
around the w orld, and prov e crucial in ﬁghting the ‘Covid-19
pandemic’. Does any one think these clowns care about ‘human
w ellbeing’ a er the death and dev astation their pandemic hoax has
purposely caused? Schw ab and co say w e should mov e forw ard with
the Internet of Bodies because ‘Keeping track of symptoms could
help us stop the spread of infection, and quickly detect new cases’.
How w onderful, but keeping track’ is all they are really botheredabout. Researchers w ere inv estigating if data gathered from
smartw atches and similar devices could be used as viral infection
alerts by tracking the user ’ s heart rate and breathing. Schw ab said in
his 2018 book Shaping the Future of the Fourth Industrial Revolution :
The lines between technologies and beings are becoming blurred and not just by the ability to
create lifelike robots or synthetics. Instead it is about the ability of new technologies to literally
become part of us. Technologies already influence how we understand ourselves, how we
think about each other, and how we determine our realities. As the technologies … give us
deeper access to parts of ourselves, we may begin to integrate digital technologies into our
bodies.
Y ou can see what the game is. T w enty-four hour control and people
– if y ou could still call them that – w ould nev er know when
something w ould go ping and take them out of circulation. It’ s the
most obvious rush to a global fascist dictatorship and the complete
submission of humanity and y et still so many are locked aw ay in
their Cult-induced perceptual coma and can’ t see it.
Smart Grid control centres
The human body is being transformed by the ‘v accines’ and in other
w ays into a synthetic cyborg that can be a ached to the global Smart
Grid which w ould be controlled from a central point and other sub-
locations of Grid manipulation. Where are these planned to be? W ell,
China for a start which is one of the Cult’ s biggest centres of
operation. The technological control system and technocratic rule
w as incubated here to be unleashed across the w orld a er the
‘Covid’ hoax came out of China in 2020. Another Smart Grid location
that will surprise people new to this is Israel. I hav e exposed in The
Trigger  how Sabbatian technocrats, intelligence and military
operativ es w ere behind the horrors of 9/11 and not ` 19 Arab hĳackers’
who somehow manifested the ability to pilot big passenger airliners
when instructors at puddle-jumping ﬂying schools described some
of them as a joke. The 9/11 a acks w ere made possible through
control of civilian and military air computer systems and those of the
White House, P entagon and connected agencies. See The Trigger  – itwill blow y our mind. The controlling and coordinating force w ere
the Sabbatian netw orks in Israel and the United States which by then
had inﬁltrated the entire US gov ernment, military and intelligence
system. The real name of the American Deep State is ‘Sabbatian
State’. Israel is a tiny country of only nine million people, but it is
one of the global centres of cyber operations and fast catching Silicon
V alley in importance to the Cult. Israel is known as the ‘start-up
nation’ for all the cyber companies spawned there with the
Sabbatian specialisation of ‘cyber security’ that I mentioned earlier
which giv es those companies access to computer systems of their
clients in real time through ‘backdoors’ wri en into the coding when
security so w are is downloaded. The Sabbatian centre of cyber
operations outside Silicon V alley is the Israeli military Cyber
Intelligence Unit, the biggest infrastructure project in Israel’ s history ,
headquartered in the desert-city of Beersheba and inv olving some
20,000 ‘cyber soldiers’. Here are located a literal army of Internet
trolls scanning social media, forums and comment lists for any one
challenging the Cult agenda. The UK military has something similar
with its 77th Brigade and associated operations. The Beersheba
complex includes research and dev elopment centres for other Cult
operations such as Intel, Microso , IBM, Google, Apple, Hewle -
P ackard, Cisco Systems, Facebook and Motorola. T echcrunch.com
ran an article about the Beersheba global Internet technology centre
headlined ‘Israel’ s desert city of Beersheba is turning into a cybertech
oasis’:
The military’s massive relocation of its prestigious technology units, the presence of
multinational and local companies, a close proximity to Ben Gurion University and generous
government subsidies are turning Beersheba into a major global cybertech hub. Beersheba has
all of the ingredients of a vibrant security technology ecosystem, including Ben Gurion
University with its graduate program in cybersecurity and Cyber Security Research Center, and
the presence of companies such as EMC, Deutsche Telekom, PayPal, Oracle, IBM, and
Lockheed Martin. It’s also the future home of the INCB (Israeli National Cyber Bureau); offers
a special income tax incentive for cyber security companies, and was the site for the
relocation of the army’s intelligence corps units.Sabbatians hav e taken ov er the cyber w orld through the following
process: They scan the schools for likely cyber talent and dev elop
them at Ben Gurion Univ ersity and their period of conscription in
the Israeli Defense Forces when they are stationed at the Beersheba
complex. When the cyber talented oﬃcially leav e the army they are
funded to start cyber companies with technology dev eloped by
themselv es or giv en to them by the state. Much of this is stolen
through backdoors of computer systems around the w orld with
America top of the list. Others are sent oﬀ to Silicon V alley to start
companies or join the major ones and so w e hav e many major
positions ﬁlled by apparently ‘Jewish’ but really Sabbatian
operativ es. Google, Y ouT ube and Facebook are all run by ‘Jewish’
CEOs while T wi er is all but run by ultra-Zionist hedge-fund shark
P aul Singer . At the centre of the Sabbatian global cyber w eb is the
Israeli army’ s Unit 8200 which specialises in hacking into computer
systems of other countries, inserting viruses, gathering information,
instigating malfunction, and ev en taking control of them from a
distance. A long list of Sabbatians inv olv ed with 9/11, Silicon V alley
and Israeli cyber security companies are operativ es of Unit 8200.
This is not about Israel. It’ s about the Cult. Israel is planned to be a
Smart Grid hub as with China and what is happening at Beersheba is
not for the beneﬁt of Jewish people who are treated disgustingly by
the Sabbatian elite that control the country . A glance at the
Nuremberg Codes will tell y ou that.
The story is much bigger than ‘Covid’, important as that is to
where w e are being taken. Now , though, it’ s time to really strap in.
There’ s more … much more …ICHAPTER ELEVEN
Who controls the Cult?
Awake, arise or be forever fall’n
John Milton,  Paradise Lost
hav e exposed this far the lev el of the Cult conspiracy that operates
in the w orld of the seen and within the global secret society and
satanic netw ork which operates in the shadows one step back from
the seen. The story , how ev er , goes much deeper than that.
The ‘Covid’ hoax is major part of the Cult agenda, but only part,
and to grasp the biggest picture w e hav e to expand our a ention
bey ond the realm of human sight and into the inﬁnity of possibility
that w e cannot see. It is from here, ultimately , that humanity is being
manipulated into a state of total control by the force which dictates
the actions of the Cult. How much of reality can w e see? Next to
damn all is the answ er . W e may appear to see all there is to see in the
‘space’ our ey es surv ey and observ e, but li le could be further from
the truth. The human ‘w orld’ is only a tiny band of frequency that
the body’ s visual and perceptual systems can decode into perception
of a ‘w orld’. According to mainstream science the electromagnetic
spectrum is 0.005 percent of what exists in the Univ erse ( Fig 10 ). The
maximum estimate I hav e seen is 0.5 percent and either w ay it’ s
miniscule. I say it is far , far , smaller ev en than 0.005 percent when
y ou compare reality w e see with the totality of reality that w e don’ t.
Now get this if y ou are new to such information: V isible light, the
only band of frequency that w e can see, is a fraction  of the 0.005percent ( Fig 11  ov erleaf ). T ake this further and realise that our
univ erse is one of inﬁnite univ erses and that univ erses are only a
fragment of ov erall reality – infinite  reality . Then compare that with
the almost inﬁnitesimal frequency band of visible light or human
sight. Y ou see that humans are as near blind as it is possible to be
without actually being so. Artist and ﬁlmmaker , Sergio T oporek,
said:
Figure 10:  H u m a n s  c a n  p e r c e i v e  s u c h  a  t i n y  b a n d  o f  v i s u a l  r e a l i t y  i t ’ s  l a u g h a b l e .
Figure 11:  W e  c a n  s e e  a  s m e a r  o f  t h e  0 . 0 0 5  p e r c e n t  e l e c t r o m a g n e t i c  s p e c t r u m ,  b u t  w e  s t i l l
k n o w  i t  a l l .  Y e p ,  m a k e s  s e n s e .
C o n s i d e r  t h a t  y o u  c a n  s e e  l e s s  t h a n  1 %  o f  t h e  e l e c t r o m a g n e t i c  s p e c t r u m  a n d  h e a r  l e s s  t h a n
1 %  o f  t h e  a c o u s t i c  s p e c t r u m .  9 0 %  o f  t h e  c e l l s  i n  y o u r  b o d y  c a r r y  t h e i r  o w n  m i c r o b i a l  D N A
a n d  a r e  n o t  ‘ y o u ’ .  T h e  a t o m s  i n  y o u r  b o d y  a r e  9 9 . 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 %  e m p t y  s p a c e  a n d
n o n e  o f  t h e m  a r e  t h e  o n e s  y o u  w e r e  b o r n  w i t h  . . .  H u m a n  b e i n g s  h a v e  4 6  c h r o m o s o m e s ,  t w o
l e s s  t h a n  a  p o t a t o .T h e  e x i s t e n c e  o f  t h e  r a i n b o w  d e p e n d s  o n  t h e  c o n i c a l  p h o t o r e c e p t o r s  i n  y o u r  e y e s ;  t o  a n i m a l s
w i t h o u t  c o n e s ,  t h e  r a i n b o w  d o e s  n o t  e x i s t .  S o  y o u  d o n ’ t  j u s t  l o o k  a t  a  r a i n b o w ,  y o u  c r e a t e  i t .
T h i s  i s  p r e t t y  a m a z i n g ,  e s p e c i a l l y  c o n s i d e r i n g  t h a t  a l l  t h e  b e a u t i f u l  c o l o u r s  y o u  s e e  r e p r e s e n t
l e s s  t h a n  1 %  o f  t h e  e l e c t r o m a g n e t i c  s p e c t r u m .
Suddenly the ‘w orld’ of humans looks a v ery diﬀerent place. T ake
into account, too, that Planet Earth when compared with the
projected size of this single univ erse is the equiv alent of a billionth of
a pinhead. Imagine the ratio that w ould be when compared to
inﬁnite reality . T o think that Christianity once insisted that Earth and
humanity w ere the centre of ev erything. This background is vital if
w e are going to appreciate the nature of ‘human’ and how w e can be
manipulated by an unseen force. T o human visual reality virtually
everything  is unseen and y et the prev ailing perception within the
institutions and so much of the public is that if w e can’ t see it, touch
it, hear it, taste it and smell it then it cannot exist. Such perception is
indoctrinated and encouraged by the Cult and its agents because it
isolates believ ers in the strictly limited, village-idiot, realm of the ﬁv e
senses where perceptions can be ﬁrew alled and information
controlled. Most of those perpetuating the ‘this-w orld-is-all-there-is’
insanity are themselv es indoctrinated into believing the same
delusion. While major play ers and inﬂuencers know that oﬃcial
reality is laughable most of those in science, academia and medicine
really believ e the nonsense they peddle and teach succeeding
generations. Those who challenge the orthodoxy are dismissed as
nu ers and freaks to protect the manufactured illusion from
exposure. Observ e the dynamic of the ‘Covid’ hoax and y ou will see
how that takes the same form. The inner -circle psychopaths knows
it’ s a gigantic scam, but almost the entirety of those imposing their
fascist rules believ e that ‘Covid’ is all that they’ re told it is.
Stolen identity
Ask people who they are and they will giv e y ou their name, place of
birth, location, job, family background and life story . Y et that is not
who they are – it is what they are experiencing . The diﬀerence is
absolutely crucial . The true ‘I’, the eternal, inﬁnite ‘I’, is consciousness,a state of being aw are. Forget ‘form’. That is a v ehicle for a brief
experience. Consciousness does not come from  the brain, but through
the brain and ev en that is more symbolic than literal. W e are
aw areness, pure aw areness, and this is what withdraws from the
body at what w e call ‘death’ to continue our eternal beingness,
isness , in other realms of reality within the limitlessness of inﬁnity or
the Biblical ‘many mansions in my father ’ s house’. Labels of a
human life, man, w oman, transgender , black, white, brown,
nationality , circumstances and income are not who w e are. They are
what w e are – aw areness – is experiencing  in a brief connection with a
band of frequency w e call ‘human’. The labels are not the self; they
are, to use the title of one of my books, a Phantom  Self. I am not
David Icke born in Leicester , England, on April 29th, 1952. I am the
consciousness having that experience . The Cult and its non-human
masters seek to convince us through the institutions of ‘education’,
science, medicine, media and gov ernment that what w e are
experiencing  is who w e are . It’ s so easy to control and direct
perception locked aw ay in the bewildered illusions of the ﬁv e senses
with no expanded radar . T ry , by contrast, doing the same with a
humanity aw are of its true self and its true pow er to consciously
create its reality and experience. How is it possible to do this? W e do
it all day ev ery day . If y ou perceiv e y ourself as ‘li le me’ with no
pow er to impact upon y our life and the w orld then y our life
experience will reﬂect that. Y ou will hand the pow er y ou don’ t think
y ou hav e to authority in all its forms which will use it to control y our
experience. This, in turn, will appear to conﬁrm y our perception of
‘li le me’ in a self-fulﬁlling feedback loop. But that is what ‘li le me’
really is – a perception . W e are all ‘big-me’, inﬁnite me, and the Cult
has to make us forget that if its will is to prev ail. W e are therefore
manipulated and pressured into self-identifying with human labels
and not the consciousness/aw areness experiencing  those human
labels.
The phenomenon of identity politics is a Cult-instigated
manipulation technique to sub-divide previous labels into ev en
smaller ones. A United States univ ersity employs this list of le ers todescribe student identity: LGBTTQQF AGPBDSM or lesbian, gay ,
bisexual, transgender , transsexual, queer , questioning, ﬂexual,
asexual, gender -fuck, poly amorous, bondage/discipline,
dominance/submission and sadism/masochism. I’ m sure other lists
are ev en longer by now as people feel the need to self-identity the ‘I’
with the minutiae of race and sexual preference. W okers
programmed by the Cult for generations believ e this is about
‘inclusivity’ when it’ s really the Cult locking them aw ay into smaller
and smaller v ersions of Phantom Self while ﬁrew alling them from
the inﬂuence of their true self, the inﬁnite, eternal ‘I’. Y ou may notice
that my philosophy which contends that w e are all unique points of
a ention/aw areness within the same inﬁnite whole or Oneness is the
ultimate non-racism. The v ery sense of Oneness makes the
judgement of people by their body-type, colour or sexuality u erly
ridiculous and conﬁrms that racism has no understanding of reality
(including anti-white racism). Y et despite my perception of life Cult
agents and fast-asleep W okers label me racist to discredit my
information while they are themselv es phenomenally racist and
sexist. All they see is race and sexuality and they judge people as
good or bad, demons or untouchables, by their race and sexuality .
All they see is Phantom Self  and perceiv e themselv es in terms of
Phantom Self. They are pawns and puppets of the Cult agenda to
focus a ention and self-identity in the ﬁv e senses and play those
identities against each other to divide and rule. Columbia Univ ersity
has introduced segregated graduations in another v ersion of social
distancing designed to driv e people apart and teach them that
diﬀerent racial and cultural groups hav e nothing in common with
each other . The last thing the Cult w ants is unity . Again the pump-
primers of this will be Cult operativ es in the knowledge of what they
are doing, but the rest are just the Phantom Self blind leading the
Phantom Self blind. W e do  hav e something in common – w e are all
the same consciousness  having diﬀerent temporary experiences.
What is this ‘human’?Y es, what is  ‘human’? That is what w e are supposed to be, right? I
mean ‘human’? T rue, but ‘human’ is the experience not the ‘I’. Break
it down to basics and ‘human’ is the w ay that information is
processed. If w e are to experience and interact with this band of
frequency w e call the ‘w orld’ w e must hav e a v ehicle that operates
within that band of frequency . Our consciousness in its prime form
cannot do that; it is w ay bey ond the frequency of the human realm.
My consciousness or aw areness could not tap these keys and pick up
the cup in front of me in the same w ay that radio station A cannot
interact with radio station B when they are on diﬀerent frequencies.
The human body is the means through which w e hav e that
interaction. I hav e long described the body as a biological computer
which processes information in a w ay that allows consciousness to
experience this reality . The body is a receiv er , transmi er and
processor of information in a particular w ay that w e call human. W e
visually perceiv e only the w orld of the ﬁv e senses in a w akened state
– that is the limit of the body’ s visual decoding system. In truth it’ s
not ev en visual in the w ay w e experience ‘visual reality’ as I will
come to in a moment. W e are ‘human’ because the body processes
the information sources of human into a reality and behaviour
system that w e perceive  as human. Why does an elephant act like an
elephant and not like a human or a duck? The elephant’ s biological
computer is a diﬀerent information ﬁeld and processes information
according to that program into a visual and behaviour type w e call
an elephant. The same applies to ev erything in our reality . These
body information ﬁelds are perpetuated through procreation (like
making a copy of a so w are program). The Cult w ants to break that
cycle and interv ene technologically to transform the human
information ﬁeld into one that will change what w e call humanity . If
it can change the human information ﬁeld it will change the w ay
that ﬁeld processes information and change humanity both
‘physically’ and psychologically . Hence the messenger  (information)
RNA ‘v accines’ and so much more that is targeting human genetics
by changing the body’ s information – messaging  – construct through
food, drink, radiation, toxicity and other means.Reality that w e experience is nothing like reality as it really is in
the same w ay that the reality people experience in virtual reality
games is not the reality they are really living in. The game is only a
decoded source of information that appears to be a reality . Our
w orld is also an information construct – a simulation  (more later). In
its base form our reality is a w av eﬁeld of information much the same
in theme as W i-Fi. The ﬁv e senses decode w av eﬁeld information into
electrical information which they communicate to the brain to
decode into holographic (illusory ‘physical’) information. Diﬀerent
parts of the brain specialise in decoding diﬀerent senses and the
information is fused into a reality that appears to be outside of us
but is really inside the brain and the genetic structure in general ( Fig
12  ov erleaf ). DNA is a receiv er -transmi er of information and a vital
part of this decoding process and the body’ s connection to other
realities. Change DNA and y ou change the w ay w e decode and
connect with reality – see ‘Covid v accines’. Think of computers
decoding W i-Fi. Y ou hav e information encoded in a radiation ﬁeld
and the computer decodes that information into a v ery diﬀerent
form on the screen. Y ou can’ t see the W i-Fi until its information is
made manifest on the screen and the information on the screen is
inside the computer and not outside. I hav e just described how w e
decode the ‘human w orld’. All ﬁv e senses decode the w av eform ‘W i-
Fi’ ﬁeld into electrical signals and the brain (computer) constructs
reality inside the brain and not outside – ‘Y ou don’ t just look at a
rainbow , y ou create it’. Sound is a simple example. W e don’ t hear
sound until the brain decodes it. W av eform sound w av es are picked
up by the hearing sense and communicated to the brain in an
electrical form to be decoded into the sounds that w e hear .
Ev erything w e hear is inside the brain along with ev erything w e see,
feel, smell and taste. W ords and language are w av eform ﬁelds
generated by our v ocal chords which pass through this process until
they are decoded by the brain into w ords that w e hear . Diﬀerent
languages are diﬀerent frequency ﬁelds or sound w av es generated
by v ocal chords. Late British philosopher Alan W a s said:Figure 12:  T h e  b r a i n  r e c e i v e s  i n f o r m a t i o n  f r o m  t h e  f i v e  s e n s e s  a n d  c o n s t r u c t s  f r o m  t h a t  o u r
p e r c e i v e d  r e a l i t y .
[ W i t h o u t  t h e  b r a i n ]  t h e  w o r l d  i s  d e v o i d  o f  l i g h t ,  h e a t ,  w e i g h t ,  s o l i d i t y ,  m o t i o n ,  s p a c e ,  t i m e  o r
a n y  o t h e r  i m a g i n a b l e  f e a t u r e .  A l l  t h e s e  p h e n o m e n a  a r e  i n t e r a c t i o n s ,  o r  t r a n s a c t i o n s ,  o f
v i b r a t i o n s  w i t h  a  c e r t a i n  a r r a n g e m e n t  o f  n e u r o n s .
That’ s exactly what they are and scientist Robert Lanza describes in
his book, Biocentrism , how w e decode electromagnetic w av es and
energy into visual and ‘physical’ experience. He uses the example of
a ﬂame emi ing photons, electromagnetic energy , each pulsing
electrically and magnetically:
…  t h e s e  …  i n v i s i b l e  e l e c t r o m a g n e t i c  w a v e s  s t r i k e  a  h u m a n  r e t i n a ,  a n d  i f  ( a n d  o n l y  i f )  t h e
w a v e s  h a p p e n  t o  m e a s u r e  b e t w e e n  4 0 0  a n d  7 0 0  n a n o  m e t e r s  i n  l e n g t h  f r o m  c r e s t  t o  c r e s t ,
t h e n  t h e i r  e n e r g y  i s  j u s t  r i g h t  t o  d e l i v e r  a  s t i m u l u s  t o  t h e  8  m i l l i o n  c o n e - s h a p e d  c e l l s  i n  t h e
r e t i n a .
E a c h  i n  t u r n  s e n d  a n  e l e c t r i c a l  p u l s e  t o  a  n e i g h b o u r  n e u r o n ,  a n d  o n  u p  t h e  l i n e  t h i s  g o e s ,  a t
2 5 0  m p h ,  u n t i l  i t  r e a c h e s  t h e  …  o c c i p i t a l  l o b e  o f  t h e  b r a i n ,  i n  t h e  b a c k  o f  t h e  h e a d .  T h e r e ,  a
c a s c a d i n g  c o m p l e x  o f  n e u r o n s  f i r e  f r o m  t h e  i n c o m i n g  s t i m u l i ,  a n d  w e  s u b j e c t i v e l y  p e r c e i v e
t h i s  e x p e r i e n c e  a s  a  y e l l o w  b r i g h t n e s s  o c c u r r i n g  i n  a  p l a c e  w e  h a v e  b e e n  c o n d i t i o n e d  t o  c a l l
t h e  ‘ e x t e r n a l  w o r l d ’ .
You hear what you decodeIf a tree falls or a building collapses they make no noise unless
someone is there to decode the energetic w av es generated by the
disturbance into what w e call sound. Does a falling tree make a
noise? Only if y ou hear it – decode  it. Ev erything in our reality is a
frequency ﬁeld of information operating within the ov erall ‘W i-Fi’
ﬁeld that I call The Field. A vibrational disturbance is generated in
The Field by the ﬁelds of the falling tree or building. These
disturbance w av es are what w e decode into the sound of them
falling. If no one is there to do that then neither will make any noise.
Reality is created by the observ er – decoder  – and the perceptions  of
the observ er aﬀect the decoding process. For this reason diﬀerent
people – diﬀerent perceptions  – will perceiv e the same reality or
situation in a diﬀerent w ay . What one may perceiv e as a nightmare
another will see as an opportunity . The question of why the Cult is
so focused on controlling human perception now answ ers itself. All
experienced reality is the act of decoding and w e don’ t experience
W i-Fi until it is decoded on the computer screen. The sight and
sound of an Internet video is encoded in the W i-Fi all around us, but
w e don’ t see or hear it until the computer decodes that information.
T aste, smell and touch are all phenomena of the brain as a result of
the same process. W e don’ t taste, smell or feel anything except in the
brain and there are pain relief techniques that seek to block the
signal from the site of discomfort to the brain because if the brain
doesn’ t decode that signal w e don’ t feel pain. P ain is in the brain and
only appears to be at the point of impact thanks to the feedback loop
betw een them. W e don’ t see anything until electrical information
from the sight senses is decoded in an area at the back of the brain. If
that area is damaged w e can go blind when our ey es are perfectly
okay . So why do w e go blind if w e damage an ey e? W e damage the
information processing betw een the w av eform visual information
and the visual decoding area of the brain. If information doesn’ t
reach the brain in a form it can decode then w e can’ t see the visual
reality that it represents. What’ s more the brain is decoding only a
fraction of the information it receiv es and the rest is absorbed by thesub-conscious mind. This explanation is from the science magazine,
Wonderpedia :
E v e r y  s e c o n d ,  1 1  m i l l i o n  s e n s a t i o n s  c r a c k l e  a l o n g  t h e s e  [ b r a i n ]  p a t h w a y s  . . .  T h e  b r a i n  i s
c o n f r o n t e d  w i t h  a n  a l a r m i n g  a r r a y  o f  i m a g e s ,  s o u n d s  a n d  s m e l l s  w h i c h  i t  r i g o r o u s l y  f i l t e r s
d o w n  u n t i l  i t  i s  l e f t  w i t h  a  m a n a g e a b l e  l i s t  o f  a r o u n d  4 0 .  T h u s  4 0  s e n s a t i o n s  p e r  s e c o n d  m a k e
u p  w h a t  w e  p e r c e i v e  a s  r e a l i t y .
The ‘w orld’ is not what people are told to believ e that is it and the
inner circles of the Cult know that .
Illusory ‘physical’ reality
W e can only see a smear of 0.005 percent of the Univ erse which is
only one of a v ast array of univ erses – ‘mansions’ – within inﬁnite
reality . Ev en then the brain decodes only 40 pieces of information
(‘sensations’) from a potential 11 million  that w e receiv e ev ery
second. T w o points strike y ou from this immediately: The sheer
breathtaking stupidity of believing w e know anything so rigidly that
there’ s nothing more to know; and the potential for these processes
to be manipulated by a malev olent force to control the reality of the
population. One thing I can say for sure with no risk of contradiction
is that when y ou can perceiv e an almost indescribable fraction of
inﬁnite reality there is alw ays more to know as in tidal w av es of it.
Ancient Greek philosopher Socrates w as so right when he said that
wisdom is to know how li le w e know . How obviously true that is
when y ou think that w e are experiencing a physical w orld of solidity
that is neither physical nor solid and a w orld of apartness when
ev erything is connected. Cult-controlled ‘science’ dismisses the so-
called ‘paranormal’ and all phenomena related to that when the
‘para’-normal is perfectly normal and explains the alleged ‘great
mysteries’ which dumbfound scientiﬁc minds. There is a reason for
this. A ‘scientiﬁc mind’ in terms of the mainstream is a material
mind, a ﬁv e-sense mind imprisoned in see it, touch it, hear it, smell it
and taste it. Phenomena and happenings that can’ t be explained that
w ay leav e the ‘scientiﬁc mind’ bewildered and the rule is that if theycan’ t account for why something is happening then it can’ t, by
deﬁnition, be happening. I beg to diﬀer . T elepathy is thought w av es
passing through The Field (think w av e disturbance again) to be
decoded by someone able to connect with that w av elength
(information). For example: Y ou can pick up the thought w av es of a
friend at any distance and at the v ery least that will bring them to
mind. A few minutes later the friend calls y ou. ‘My god’, y ou say ,
‘that’ s incredible – I w as just thinking of y ou.’ Ah, but they  w ere
thinking of you  before they made the call and that’ s what y ou
decoded. Nativ e peoples not entrapped in ﬁv e-sense reality do this
so w ell it became known as the ‘bush telegraph’. Those known as
psychics and mediums (genuine ones) are doing the same only
across dimensions of reality . ‘Mind ov er ma er ’ comes from the fact
that ma er and mind are the same . The state of one inﬂuences the
state of the other . Indeed one and  the other are illusions. They are
aspects of the same ﬁeld. P aranormal phenomena are all explainable
so why are they still considered ‘mysteries’ or not happening? Once
y ou go down this road of understanding y ou begin to expand
aw areness bey ond the ﬁv e senses and that’ s the nightmare for the
Cult.
Figure 13:  H o l o g r a m s  a r e  n o t  s o l i d ,  b u t  t h e  b e s t  o n e s  a p p e a r  t o  b e .Figure 14:  H o w  h o l o g r a m s  a r e  c r e a t e d  b y  c a p t u r i n g  a  w a v e f o r m  v e r s i o n  o f  t h e  s u b j e c t  i m a g e .
Holographic ‘solidity’
Our reality is not solid, it is holographic. W e are now w ell aw are of
holograms which are widely used today . T w o-dimensional
information is decoded into a three-dimensional reality that is not
solid although can v ery much appear to be ( Fig 13 ). Holograms are
created with a laser divided into tw o parts. One goes directly onto a
holographic photographic print (‘reference beam’) and the other
takes a w av eform image of the subject (‘w orking beam’) before being
directed onto the print where it ‘collides’ with the other half of the
laser ( Fig 14 ). This creates a waveform  interference pa ern which
contains the w av eﬁeld information of whatev er is being
photographed ( Fig 15  ov erleaf ). The process can be likened to
dropping pebbles in a pond. W av es generated by each one spread
out across the w ater to collide with the others and create a w av e
representation of where the stones fell and at what speed, w eight
and distance. A w av eform interference pa ern of a hologram is akin
to the w av eform information in The Field which the ﬁv e senses
decode into electrical signals to be decoded by the brain into a
holographic illusory ‘physical’ reality . In the same w ay when a laser
(think human a ention) is directed at the w av eform interference
pa ern a three-dimensional v ersion of the subject is projected into
apparently ‘solid’ reality ( Fig 16 ). An amazing trait of holograms
rev eals more ‘paranormal mysteries’. Information of the wholehologram is encoded in w av eform in ev ery part of the interference
pa ern by the w ay they are created. This means that ev ery part  of a
hologram is a smaller v ersion of the whole. Cut the interference
w av e-pa ern into four and y ou w on’ t get four parts of the image.
Y ou get quarter -sized v ersions of the whole  image. The body is a
hologram and the same applies. Here w e hav e the basis of
acupuncture, reﬂexology and other forms of healing which identify
representations of the whole body in all of the parts, hands, feet,
ears, ev erywhere. Skilled palm readers can do what they do because
the information of whole body is encoded in the hand. The concept
of as abov e, so below , comes from this.
Figure 15:  A  w a v e f o r m  i n t e r f e r e n c e  p a t t e r n  t h a t  h o l d s  t h e  i n f o r m a t i o n  t h a t  t r a n s f o r m s  i n t o  a
h o l o g r a m .
Figure 16:  H o l o g r a p h i c  p e o p l e  i n c l u d i n g  ‘ E l v i s ’  h o l o g r a p h i c a l l y  i n s e r t e d  t o  s i n g  a  d u e t  w i t h
C e l i n e  D i o n .The question will be asked of why , if solidity is illusory , w e can’ t
just w alk through w alls and each other . The resistance is not solid
against solid; it is electromagnetic ﬁeld against electromagnetic ﬁeld
and w e decode this into the experience  of solid against solid. W e
should also not underestimate the pow er of belief to dictate reality .
What y ou believ e is impossible will be . Y our belief impacts on y our
decoding processes and they w on’ t decode what y ou think is
impossible. What w e believ e w e perceiv e and what w e perceiv e w e
experience. ‘Can’ t dos’ and ‘impossibles’ are like a ﬁrew all in a
computer system that w on’ t put on the screen what the ﬁrew all
blocks. How vital that is to understanding how human experience
has been hĳacked. I explain in The Answer , Everything You Need To
Know But Have Never Been Told  and other books a long list of
‘mysteries’ and ‘paranormal’ phenomena that are not mysterious
and perfectly normal once y ou realise what reality is and how it
w orks. ‘Ghosts’ can be seen to pass through ‘solid’ w alls because the
w alls are not solid and the ghost is a discarnate entity operating on a
frequency so diﬀerent to that of the w all that it’ s like tw o radio
stations sharing the same space while nev er interfering with each
other . I hav e seen ghosts do this myself. The apartness of people and
objects is also an illusion. Ev erything is connected by the Field like
all sea life is connected by the sea. It’ s just that within the limits of
our visual reality w e only ‘see’ holographic information and not the
ﬁeld of information that connects ev erything and from which the
holographic w orld is made manifest. If y ou can only see holographic
‘objects’ and not the ﬁeld that connects them they will appear to y ou
as unconnected to each other in the same w ay that w e see the
computer while not seeing the W i-Fi.
What you don’t know can hurt you
Okay , w e return to those ‘tw o w orlds’ of human society and the Cult
with its global netw ork of interconnecting secret societies and
satanic groups which manipulate through gov ernments,
corporations, media, religions, etc. The fundamental diﬀerence
betw een them is knowledge . The idea has been to keep humanityignorant of the plan for its total enslav ement underpinned by a
crucial ignorance of reality – who w e are and where w e are – and
how w e interact with it. ‘Human’ should be the interaction betw een
our expanded eternal consciousness and the ﬁv e-sense body
experience. W e are meant to be in  this w orld in terms of the ﬁv e
senses but not of  this w orld in relation to our greater consciousness
and perspectiv e. In that state w e experience the small picture of the
ﬁv e senses within the wider context of the big picture of aw areness
bey ond the ﬁv e senses. Put another w ay the ﬁv e senses see the dots
and expanded aw areness connects them into pictures and pa erns
that giv e context to the apparently random and unconnected.
W ithout the context of expanded aw areness the ﬁv e senses see only
apartness and randomness with apparently no meaning. The Cult
and its other -dimensional controllers seek to interv ene in the
frequency realm where ﬁv e-sense reality is supposed to connect with
expanded reality and to keep the tw o apart (more on this in the ﬁnal
chapter). When that happens ﬁv e-sense mental and emotional
processes are no longer inﬂuenced by expanded aw areness, or the
T rue ‘I’, and instead are driv en by the isolated perceptions of the
body’ s decoding systems. They are in the w orld and  of it. Here w e
hav e the human plight and why humanity with its potential for
inﬁnite aw areness can be so easily manipulatable and descend into
such extremes of stupidity .
Once the Cult isolates ﬁv e-sense mind from expanded aw areness
it can then program the mind with perceptions and beliefs by
controlling information that the mind receiv es through the
‘education’ system of the formativ e y ears and the media perceptual
bombardment and censorship of an entire lifetime. Limit perception
and a sense of the possible through limiting knowledge by limiting
and skewing information while censoring and discrediting that
which could set people free. As the title of another of my books says
… And The Truth Shall Set You Free . For this reason the last thing the
Cult w ants in circulation is the truth about anything – especially the
reality of the eternal ‘I’ – and that’ s why it is desperate to control
information. The Cult knows that information becomes perceptionwhich becomes behaviour which, collectiv ely , becomes human
society . Cult-controlled and funded mainstream ‘science’ denies the
existence of an eternal ‘I’ and seeks to dismiss and trash all evidence
to the contrary . Cult-controlled mainstream religion has a v ersion of
‘God’ that is li le more than a system of control and dictatorship
that employs threats of damnation in an a erlife to control
perceptions and behaviour in the here and now through fear and
guilt. Neither is true and it’ s the ‘neither ’ that the Cult wishes to
suppress. This ‘neither ’ is that ev erything is an expression, a point of
a ention, within an inﬁnite state of consciousness which is the real
meaning of the term ‘God’.
P erceptual obsession with the ‘physical body’ and ﬁv e-senses
means that ‘God’ becomes personiﬁed as a bearded bloke si ing
among the clouds or a raging bully who lov es us if w e do what ‘he’
w ants and condemns us to the ﬁres of hell if w e don’ t. These are no
more than a ‘spiritual’ fairy tales to control and dictate ev ents and
behaviour through fear of this ‘God’ which has bizarrely made ‘God-
fearing’ in religious circles a state to be desired. I w ould suggest that
fearing anything  is not to be encouraged and celebrated, but rather
deleted. Y ou can see why ‘God fearing’ is so beneﬁcial to the Cult
and its religions when they  decide what ‘God’ w ants and what ‘God’
demands (the Cult demands) that ev ery one do. As the great
American comedian Bill Hicks said satirising a Christian zealot: ‘I
think what God meant to say .’ How much of this inﬁnite aw areness
(‘God’) that w e access is decided by how far w e choose to expand
our perceptions, self-identity and sense of the possible. The scale of
self-identity reﬂects itself in the scale of aw areness that w e can
connect with and are inﬂuenced by – how much knowing and
insight w e hav e instead of programmed perception. Y ou cannot
expand y our aw areness into the inﬁnity of possibility when y ou
believ e that y ou are li le me P eter the postman or Mary in marketing
and nothing more. I’ll deal with this in the concluding chapter
because it’ s crucial to how w e turnaround current ev ents.
Where the Cult came fromWhen I realised in the early 1990s there w as a Cult netw ork behind
global ev ents I asked the obvious question: When did it start? I took
it back to ancient Rome and Egypt and on to Babylon and Sumer in
Mesopotamia, the ‘Land Betw een T w o Riv ers’, in what w e now call
Iraq. The tw o riv ers are the Tigris and Euphrates and this region is of
immense historical and other importance to the Cult, as is the land
called Israel only 550 miles aw ay by air . There is much more going
with deep esoteric meaning across this whole region. It’ s not only
about ‘w ars for oil’. Priceless artefacts from Mesopotamia w ere
stolen or destroy ed a er the American and British inv asion of Iraq in
2003 justiﬁed by the lies of Boy Bush and T ony Blair (their Cult
masters) about non-existent ‘w eapons of mass destruction’.
Mesopotamia w as the location of Sumer (about 5,400BC to 1,750BC),
and Babylon (about 2,350BC to 539BC). Sabbatians may hav e become
immensely inﬂuential in the Cult in modern times but they are part
of a netw ork that goes back into the mists of history . Sumer is said by
historians to be the ‘cradle of civilisation’. I disagree. I say it w as the
re-start of what w e call human civilisation a er cataclysmic ev ents
symbolised in part as the ‘Great Flood’ destroy ed the w orld that
existed before. These fantastic upheav als that I hav e been describing
in detail in the books since the early1990s appear in accounts and
legends of ancient cultures across the w orld and they are supported
by geological and biological evidence. Stone tablets found in Iraq
detailing the Sumer period say the cataclysms w ere caused by non-
human ‘gods’ they call the Anunnaki. These are described in terms
of extraterrestrial visitations in which knowledge supplied by the
Anunnaki is said to hav e been the source of at least one of the
w orld’ s oldest writing systems and dev elopments in astronomy ,
mathematics and architecture that w ere w ay ahead of their time. I
hav e cov ered this subject at length in The Biggest Secret  and Children
of the Matrix  and the same basic ‘ Anunnaki’ story can be found in
Zulu accounts in South Africa where the late and v ery great Zulu
high shaman Credo Mutw a told me that the Sumerian Anunnaki
w ere known by Zulus as the Chitauri or ‘children of the serpent’. See
my six-hour video interview with Credo on this subject entitled TheReptilian Agenda  recorded at his then home near Johannesburg in
1999 which y ou can w atch on the Ickonic media platform.
The Cult emerged out of Sumer , Babylon and Egypt (and
elsewhere) and established the Roman Empire before expanding
with the Romans into northern Europe from where many empires
w ere sav agely imposed in the form of Cult-controlled societies all
ov er the w orld. Mass death and destruction w as their calling card.
The Cult established its centre of operations in Europe and European
Empires w ere Cult empires which allow ed it to expand into a global
force. Spanish and P ortuguese colonialists headed for Central and
South America while the British and French targeted North America.
Africa w as colonised by Britain, France, Belgium, the Netherlands,
P ortugal, Spain, Italy , and Germany . Some like Britain and France
mov ed in on the Middle East. The British Empire w as by far the
biggest for a simple reason. By now Britain w as the headquarters of
the Cult from which it expanded to form Canada, the United States,
Australia and New Zealand. The Sun nev er set on the British Empire
such w as the scale of its occupation. London remains a global centre
for the Cult along with Rome and the V atican although others hav e
emerged in Israel and China. It is no accident that the ‘virus’ is
alleged to hav e come out of China while Italy w as chosen as the
means to terrify the W estern population into compliance with
‘Covid’ fascism. Nor that Israel has led the w orld in ‘Covid’ fascism
and mass ‘v accination’.
Y ou w ould think that I w ould mention the United States here, but
while it has been an important means of imposing the Cult’ s will it is
less signiﬁcant than w ould appear and is currently in the process of
having what pow er it does hav e deleted. The Cult in Europe has
mostly loaded the guns for the US to ﬁre. America has been
controlled from Europe from the start through Cult operativ es in
Britain and Europe. The American Rev olution w as an illusion to
make it appear that America w as gov erning itself while v ery
diﬀerent forces w ere pulling the strings in the form of Cult families
such as the Rothschilds through the Rockefellers and other
subordinates. The Rockefellers are extremely close to Bill Gates andestablished both scalpel and drug ‘medicine’ and the W orld Health
Organization. They play a major role in the dev elopment and
circulation of v accines through the Rockefeller Foundation on which
Bill Gates said his Foundation is based. Why w ouldn’ t this be the
case when the Rockefellers and Gates are on the same team? Cult
inﬁltration of human society goes w ay back into what w e call history
and has been constantly expanding and centralising pow er with the
goal of establishing a global structure to dictate ev erything. Look
how this has been adv anced in great leaps with the ‘Covid’ hoax.
The non-human dimension
I researched and observ ed the comings and goings of Cult operativ es
through the centuries and ev en thousands of y ears as they w ere
born, w orked to promote the agenda within the secret society and
satanic netw orks, and then died for others to replace them. Clearly
there had to be a coordinating force that spanned this entire period
while operativ es who w ould not hav e seen the end goal in their
lifetimes came and w ent adv ancing the plan ov er millennia. I w ent
in search of that coordinating force with the usual support from the
extraordinary synchronicity of my life which has been an almost
daily experience since 1990. I saw common themes in religious texts
and ancient cultures about a non-human force manipulating human
society from the hidden. Christianity calls this force Satan, the Devil
and demons; Islam refers to the Jinn or Djinn; Zulus hav e their
Chitauri (spelt in other w ays in diﬀerent parts of Africa); and the
Gnostic people in Egypt in the period around and before 400AD
referred to this phenomena as the ‘ Archons’, a w ord meaning rulers
in Greek. Central American cultures speak of the ‘Predators’ among
other names and the same theme is ev erywhere. I will use ‘ Archons’
as a collectiv e name for all of them. When y ou see how their nature
and behaviour is described all these diﬀerent sources are clearly
talking about the same force. Gnostics described the Archons in
terms of ‘luminous ﬁre’ while Islam relates the Jinn to ‘smokeless
ﬁre’. Some refer to beings in form that could occasionally be seen,
but the most common of common theme is that they operate fromunseen realms which means almost all existence to the visual
processes of humans. I had concluded that this w as indeed the
foundation of human control and that the Cult w as operating within
the human frequency band on behalf of this hidden force when I
came across the writings of Gnostics which supported my
conclusions in the most extraordinary w ay .
A sealed earthen jar w as found in 1945 near the town of Nag
Hammadi about 75-80 miles north of Luxor on the banks of the Riv er
Nile in Egypt. Inside w as a treasure trov e of manuscripts and texts
le  by the Gnostic people some 1,600 y ears earlier . They included 13
leather -bound papyrus codices (manuscripts) and more than 50 texts
wri en in Coptic Egyptian estimated to hav e been hidden in the jar
in the period of 400AD although the source of the information goes
back much further . Gnostics ov ersaw the Great or Roy al Library of
Alexandria, the fantastic depository of ancient texts detailing
adv anced knowledge and accounts of human history . The Library
w as dismantled and destroy ed in stages ov er a long period with the
death-blow deliv ered by the Cult-established Roman Church in the
period around 415AD. The Church of Rome w as the Church of
Babylon relocated as I said earlier . Gnostics w ere not a race. They
w ere a w ay of perceiving reality . Whenev er they established
themselv es and their information circulated the terrorists of the
Church of Rome w ould target them for destruction. This happened
with the Great Library and with the Gnostic Cathars who w ere
burned to death by the psychopaths a er a long period of
oppression at the siege of the Castle of Monségur in southern France
in 1244. The Church has alw ays been terriﬁed of Gnostic information
which demolishes the oﬃcial Christian narrativ e although there is
much in the Bible that supports the Gnostic view if y ou read it in
another w ay . T o any one studying the texts of what became known as
the Nag Hammadi Library it is clear that great sw athes of Christian
and Biblical belief has its origin with Gnostics sources going back to
Sumer . Gnostic themes hav e been twisted to manipulate the
perceiv ed reality of Bible believ ers. Biblical texts hav e been in the
open for centuries where they could be changed while Gnosticdocuments found at Nag Hammadi w ere sealed aw ay and
untouched for 1,600 y ears. What y ou see is what they wrote.
Use your pneuma not your nous
Gnosticism and Gnostic come from ‘gnosis’ which means
knowledge, or rather secret  knowledge, in the sense of spiritual
aw areness – knowledge about reality and life itself. The desperation
of the Cult’ s Church of Rome to destroy the Gnostics can be
understood when the knowledge they w ere circulating w as the last
thing the Cult w anted the population to know . Sixteen hundred
y ears later the same Cult is w orking hard to undermine and silence
me for the same reason. The dynamic betw een knowledge and
ignorance is a constant. ‘Time’ appears to mov e on, but essential
themes remain the same. W e are told to ‘use y our nous’, a Gnostic
w ord for head/brain/intelligence. They said, how ev er , that spiritual
aw akening or ‘salv ation’ could only be secured by expanding
aw areness beyond  what they called nous  and into pneuma  or Inﬁnite
Self. Obviously as I read these texts the parallels with what I hav e
been saying since 1990 w ere fascinating to me. There is a univ ersal
truth that spans human history and in that case why w ouldn’ t w e be
talking the same language 16 centuries apart? When y ou free
y ourself from the perception program of the ﬁv e senses and explore
expanded realms of consciousness y ou are going to connect with the
same information no ma er what the perceiv ed ‘era’ within a
manufactured timeline of a single and tiny range of manipulated
frequency . Humans w orking with ‘smart’ technology or knocking
rocks together in cav es is only a timeline appearing to operate within
the human frequency band. Expanded aw areness and the
knowledge it holds hav e alw ays been there whether the era be Stone
Age or computer age. W e can only access that knowledge by
opening ourselv es to its frequency which the ﬁv e-sense prison cell is
designed to stop us doing. Gates, Fauci, Whi y , V allance,
Zuckerberg, Brin, P age, W ojcicki, Bezos, and all the others behind
the ‘Covid’ hoax clearly hav e a long w ait before their range of
frequency can make that connection giv en that an open heart iscrucial to that as w e shall see. Instead of accessing knowledge
directly through expanded aw areness it is giv en to Cult operativ es
by the secret society netw orks of the Cult where it has been passed
on ov er thousands of y ears outside the public arena. Expanded
realms of consciousness is where great artists, composers and
writers ﬁnd their inspiration and where truth aw aits any one open
enough to connect with it. W e need to go there fast.
Archon hijack
A ﬁ h of the Nag Hammadi texts describe the existence and
manipulation of the Archons led by a ‘Chief Archon’ they call
‘Y aldabaoth’, or the ‘Demiurge’, and this is the Christian ‘Devil’,
‘Satan’, ‘Lucifer ’, and his demons. Archons in Biblical symbolism are
the ‘fallen ones’ which are also referred to as fallen angels a er the
angels expelled from heav en according to the Abrahamic religions of
Judaism, Christianity and Islam. These angels are claimed to tempt
humans to ‘sin’ ongoing and y ou will see how accurate that
symbolism is during the rest of the book. The theme of ‘original sin’
is related to the ‘Fall’ when Adam and Ev e w ere ‘tempted by the
serpent’ and fell from a state of innocence and ‘obedience’
(connection) with God into a state of disobedience (disconnection).
The Fall is said to hav e brought sin into the w orld and corrupted
ev erything including human nature. Y aldabaoth, the ‘Lord Archon’,
is described by Gnostics as a ‘counterfeit spirit’, ‘The Blind One’,
‘The Blind God’, and ‘The Foolish One’. The Jewish name for
Y aldabaoth in T almudic writings is Samael which translates as
‘P oison of God’, or ‘Blindness of God’. Y ou see the parallels.
Y aldabaoth in Islamic belief is the Muslim Jinn devil known as
Shaytan – Shaytan is Satan as the same themes are found all ov er the
w orld in ev ery religion and culture. The ‘Lord God’ of the Old
T estament is the ‘Lord Archon’ of Gnostic manuscripts and that’ s
why he’ s such a bloodthirsty bastard. Satan is known by Christians
as ‘the Demon of Demons’ and Gnostics called Y aldabaoth the
‘ Archon of Archons’. Both are known as ‘The Deceiv er ’. W e are
talking about the same ‘bloke’ for sure and these common themesusing diﬀerent names, storylines and symbolism tell a common tale
of the human plight.
Archons are referred to in Nag Hammadi documents as mind
parasites, inv erters, guards, gatekeepers, detainers, judges, pitiless
ones and deceiv ers. The ‘Covid’ hoax alone is a glaring example of
all these things. The Biblical ‘God’ is so diﬀerent in the Old and New
T estaments because they are not describing the same phenomenon.
The vindictiv e, angry , hate-ﬁlled, ‘God’ of the Old T estament, known
as Y ahw eh, is Y aldabaoth who is depicted in Cult-dictated popular
culture as the ‘Dark Lord’, ‘Lord of Time’, Lord (Darth) V ader and
Dormammu, the evil ruler of the ‘Dark Dimension’ trying to take
ov er the ‘Earth Dimension’ in the Marv el comic movie, Dr Strange .
Y aldabaoth is both the Old T estament ‘god’ and the Biblical ‘Satan’.
Gnostics referred to Y aldabaoth as the ‘Great Architect of the
Univ erse’ and the Cult-controlled Freemason netw ork calls their god
‘the ‘Great Architect of the Univ erse’ (also Grand Architect). The
‘Great Architect’ Y aldabaoth is symbolised by the Cult as the all-
seeing ey e at the top of the pyramid on the Great Seal of the United
States and the dollar bill. Archon is encoded in arch -itect as it is in
arch -angels and arch -bishops. All religions hav e the theme of a force
for good and force for evil in some sort of spiritual w ar and there is a
reason for that – the theme is true. The Cult and its non-human
masters are quite happy for this to circulate. They present
themselv es as the force for good ﬁghting evil when they are really
the force of evil (absence of lov e). The whole foundation of Cult
modus operandi is inv ersion. They promote themselv es as a force for
good and any one challenging them in pursuit of peace, lov e,
fairness, truth and justice is condemned as a satanic force for evil.
This has been the game plan throughout history whether the Church
of Rome inquisitions of non-believ ers or ‘conspiracy theorists’ and
‘anti-v axxers’ of today . The technique is the same whatev er the
timeline era.
Yaldabaoth is revolting (true)Y aldabaoth and the Archons are said to hav e rev olted against God
with Y aldabaoth claiming to be  God – the All That Is . The Old
T estament ‘God’ (Y aldabaoth) demanded to be w orshipped as such: ‘
I am  the LORD, and there is none else, there is no God beside me’
(Isaiah 45:5). I hav e quoted in other books a man who said he w as
the unoﬃcial son of the late Baron Philippe de Rothschild of the
Mouton-Rothschild wine producing estates in France who died in
1988 and he told me about the Rothschild ‘rev olt from God’. The
man said he w as giv en the name Phillip Eugene de Rothschild and
w e shared long correspondence many y ears ago while he w as living
under another identity . He said that he w as conceiv ed through
‘occult incest’ which (within the Cult) w as ‘normal and to be
admired’. ‘Phillip’ told me about his experience a ending satanic
rituals with rich and famous people whom he names and y ou can
see them and the wider background to Cult Satanism in my other
books starting with The Biggest Secret . Cult rituals are interactions
with Archontic ‘gods’. ‘Phillip’ described Baron Philippe de
Rothschild as ‘a master Satanist and hater of God’ and he used the
same term ‘rev olt from God’ associated with
Y aldabaoth/Satan/Lucifer/the Devil in describing the Sabbatian
Rothschild dynasty . ‘I play ed a key role in my family’ s rev olt from
God’, he said. That role w as to inﬁltrate in classic Sabbatian style the
Christian Church, but ev entually he escaped the mind-prison to liv e
another life. The Cult has been targeting religion in a plan to make
w orship of the Archons the global one-w orld religion. Inﬁltration of
Satanism into modern ‘culture’, especially among the y oung,
through music videos, stage shows and other means, is all part of
this.
Nag Hammadi texts describe Y aldabaoth and the Archons in their
prime form as energy – consciousness – and say they can take form if
they choose in the same w ay that consciousness takes form as a
human. Y aldabaoth is called ‘formless’ and represents a deeply
inv erted, distorted and chaotic state of consciousness which seeks to
a ached to humans and turn them into a likeness of itself in an
a empt at assimilation. For that to happen it has to manipulatehumans into low frequency mental and emotional states that match
its own. Archons can certainly appear in human form and this is the
origin of the psychopathic personality . The energetic distortion
Gnostics called Y aldabaoth is  psychopathy . When psychopathic
Archons take human form that human will be a psychopath as an
expression of Y aldabaoth consciousness. Cult psychopaths are
Archons in human form. The principle is the same as that portray ed
in the 2009 Avatar  movie when the American military trav elled to a
ﬁctional Earth-like moon called P andora in the Alpha Centauri star
system to inﬁltrate a society of blue people, or Na’vi, by hiding
within bodies that looked like the Na’vi. Archons posing as humans
hav e a particular hybrid information ﬁeld, part human, part Archon,
(the ancient ‘demigods’) which processes information in a w ay that
manifests behaviour to match their psychopathic evil, lack of
empathy and compassion, and stops them being inﬂuenced by the
empathy , compassion and lov e that a fully-human information ﬁeld
is capable of expressing. Cult bloodlines interbreed, be they roy alty
or dark suits, for this reason and y ou hav e their obsession with
incest. Interbreeding with full-blown humans w ould dilute the
Archontic energy ﬁeld that guarantees psychopathy in its
representativ es in the human realm.
Gnostic writings say the main non-human forms that Archons
take are serpentine  (what I hav e called for decades ‘reptilian’ amid
unbounded ridicule from the Archontically-programmed) and what
Gnostics describe as ‘an unborn baby or foetus with grey skin and
dark, unmoving ey es’. This is an excellent representation of the ET
‘Greys’ of UFO folklore which large numbers of people claim to hav e
seen and been abducted by – Zulu shaman Credo Mutw a among
them. I agree with those that believ e in extraterrestrial or
interdimensional visitations today and for thousands of y ears past.
No w onder with their adv anced knowledge and technological
capability they w ere perceiv ed and w orshipped as gods for
technological and other ‘miracles’ they appeared to perform.
Imagine someone arriving in a culture disconnected from the
modern w orld with a smartphone and computer . They w ould beseen as a ‘god’ capable of ‘miracles’. The Renegade Mind, how ev er ,
w ants to know the source of ev erything and not only the w ay that
source manifests as human or non-human. In the same w ay that a
Renegade Mind seeks the original source material for the ‘Covid
virus’ to see if what is claimed is true. The original source of
Archons in form is consciousness – the distorted state of
consciousness known to Gnostics as Y aldabaoth.
‘Revolt from God’ is energetic disconnection
Where I am going next will make a lot of sense of religious texts and
ancient legends relating to ‘Satan’, Lucifer ’ and the ‘gods’. Gnostic
descriptions sync perfectly with the themes of my own research ov er
the y ears in how they describe a consciousness distortion seeking to
impose itself on human consciousness. I’v e referred to the core of
inﬁnite aw areness in previous books as Inﬁnite A w areness in
A w areness of Itself. By that I mean a lev el of aw areness that knows
that it is all aw areness and is aw are of all aw areness. From here
comes the frequency of lov e in its true sense and balance which is
what lov e is on one lev el – the balance of all forces into a single
whole called Oneness and Isness. The more w e disconnect from this
state of lov e that many call ‘God’ the constituent parts of that
Oneness start to unrav el and express themselv es as a part and not a
whole. They become individualised as intellect, mind, selﬁshness,
hatred, envy , desire for pow er ov er others, and such like. This is not
a problem in the greater scheme in that ‘God’, the All That Is , can
experience all these possibilities through diﬀerent expressions of
itself including humans. What w e as expressions of the whole
experience the All That Is  experiences. W e are the All That Is
experiencing itself. As w e withdraw from that state of Oneness w e
disconnect from its inﬂuence and things can get v ery unpleasant and
v ery stupid. Archontic consciousness is at the extreme end of that. It
has so disconnected from the inﬂuence of Oneness that it has become
an inv ersion of unity and lov e, an inv ersion of ev erything, an
inv ersion of life itself. Evil is appropriately liv e wri en backw ards.
Archontic consciousness is obsessed with death, an inv ersion of life,and so its manifestations in Satanism are obsessed with death. They
use inv erted symbols in their rituals such as the inv erted pentagram
and cross. Sabbatians as Archontic consciousness incarnate inv ert
Judaism and ev ery other religion and culture they inﬁltrate. They
seek disunity and chaos and they fear unity and harmony as they
fear lov e like garlic to a v ampire. As a result the Cult, Archons
incarnate, act with such evil, psychopathy and lack of empathy and
compassion disconnected as they are from the source of lov e. How
could Bill Gates and the rest of the Archontic psychopaths do what
they hav e to human society in the ‘Covid’ era with all the death,
suﬀering and destruction inv olv ed and hav e no emotional
consequence for the impact on others? Now y ou know . Why hav e
Zuckerberg, Brin, P age, W ojcicki and company callously censored
information w arning about the dangers of the ‘v accine’ while
thousands hav e been dying and having sev ere, sometimes life-
changing reactions? Now y ou know . Why hav e T edros, Fauci,
Whi y , V allance and their like around the w orld been using case and
death ﬁgures they’ re aw are are fraudulent to justify lockdowns and
all the deaths and destroy ed liv es that hav e come from that? Now
y ou know . Why did Christian Drosten produce and promote a
‘testing’ protocol that he knew couldn’ t test for infectious disease
which led to a global human catastrophe. Now y ou know . The
Archontic mind doesn’ t giv e a shit ( Fig 17 ). I personally think that
Gates and major Cult insiders are a form of AI cyborg that the
Archons w ant humans to become.Figure 17:  A r t i s t  N e i l  H a g u e ’ s  v e r s i o n  o f  t h e  ‘ C o v i d ’  h i e r a r c h y .
Human batteries
A state of such inv ersion does hav e its consequences, how ev er . The
lev el of disconnection from the Source of All means that y ou
withdraw from that source of energetic sustenance and creativity .
This means that y ou hav e to ﬁnd y our own supply of energetic
pow er and it has – us . When the Morpheus character in the ﬁrst
Matrix  movie held up a ba ery he spoke a profound truth when he
said: ‘The Matrix is a computer -generated dream w orld built to keep
us under control in order to change the human being into one ofthese.’ The statement w as true in all respects. W e do liv e in a
technologically-generated virtual reality simulation (more v ery
shortly) and w e hav e been manipulated to be an energy source for
Archontic consciousness. The Disney-Pixar animated movie
Monsters, Inc . in 2001 symbolised the dynamic when monsters in
their w orld had no energy source and they w ould enter the human
w orld to terrify children in their beds, catch the child’ s scream, terror
(low-vibrational frequencies), and take that energy back to pow er
the monster w orld. The lead character y ou might remember w as a
single giant ey e and the symbolism of the Cult’ s all-seeing ey e w as
obvious. Ev ery thought and emotion is broadcast as a frequency
unique to that thought and emotion. Feelings of lov e and joy ,
empathy and compassion, are high, quick, frequencies while fear ,
depression, anxiety , suﬀering and hate are low , slow , dense
frequencies. Which kind do y ou think Archontic consciousness can
connect with and absorb? In such a low and dense frequency state
there’ s no w ay it can connect with the energy of lov e and joy .
Archons can only feed oﬀ energy compatible with their own
frequency and they and their Cult agents w ant to delete the human
w orld of lov e and joy and manipulate the transmission of low
vibrational frequencies through low-vibrational human mental and
emotional states. We are their energy source . W ars are energetic
banquets to the Archons – a w orld w ar ev en more so – and think
how much low-frequency mental and emotional energy has been
generated from the consequences for humanity of the ‘Covid’ hoax
orchestrated by Archons incarnate like Gates.
The ancient practice of human sacriﬁce ‘to the gods’, continued in
secret today by the Cult, is based on the same principle. ‘The gods’
are Archontic consciousness in diﬀerent forms and the sacriﬁce is
induced into a state of intense terror to generate the energy the
Archontic frequency can absorb. Incarnate Archons in the ritual
drink the blood which contains an adrenaline they crav e which
ﬂoods into the bloodstream when people are terrorised. Most of the
sacriﬁces, ancient and modern, are children and the theme of
‘sacriﬁcing y oung virgins to the gods’ is just code for children. Theyhav e a particular pre-puberty energy that Archons w ant more than
anything and the energy of the y oung in general is their target. The
California Department of Education w ants students to chant the
names of Aztec gods (Archontic gods) once w orshipped in human
sacriﬁce rituals in a curriculum designed to encourage them to
‘challenge racist, bigoted, discriminatory , imperialist/colonial
beliefs’, join ‘social mov ements that struggle for social justice’, and
‘build new possibilities for a post-racist, post-systemic racism
society’. It’ s the usual W oke crap that inv erts racism and calls it anti-
racism. In this case solidarity with ‘indigenous tribes’ is being used
as an excuse to chant the names of ‘gods’ to which people w ere
sacriﬁced (and still are in secret). What an example of W oke’ s
inability to see bey ond black and white, us and them, They condemn
the colonisation of these tribal cultures by Europeans (quite right),
but those cultures sacriﬁcing people including children to their
‘gods’, and mass murdering untold numbers as the Aztecs did, is
just ﬁne. One chant is to the Aztec god T ezcatlipoca who had a man
sacriﬁced to him in the 5th month of the Aztec calendar . His heart
w as cut out and he w as eaten. Oh, that’ s okay then. Come on
children … a er three … Other sacriﬁcial ‘gods’ for the y oung to
chant their allegiance include Quetzalcoatl, Huitzilopochtli and Xipe
T otec. The curriculum says that ‘chants, aﬃrmations, and energizers
can be used to bring the class together , build unity around ethnic
studies principles and v alues, and to reinvigorate the class following
a lesson that may be emotionally taxing or ev en when student
engagement may appear to be low’. W ell, that’ s the cov er story ,
anyw ay . Chanting and mantras are the repetition of a particular
frequency generated from the v ocal cords and chanting the names of
these Archontic ‘gods’ tunes y ou into their frequency . That is the last
thing y ou w ant when it allows for energetic synchronisation,
a achment and perceptual inﬂuence. Initiates chant the names of
their ‘Gods’ in their rituals for this v ery reason.
Vampires of the WokeP aedophilia is another w ay that Archons absorb the energy of
children. P aedophiles possessed by Archontic consciousness are
used as the conduit during sexual abuse for discarnate Archons to
v ampire the energy of the y oung they desire so much. Stupendous
numbers of children disappear ev ery y ear nev er to be seen again
although y ou w ould nev er know from the media. Imagine how
much low-vibrational energy has been generated by children during
the ‘Covid’ hoax when so many hav e become depressed and
psychologically destroy ed to the point of killing themselv es.
Shocking numbers of children are now taken by the state from
loving parents to be handed to others. I can tell y ou from long
experience of researching this since 1996 that many end up with
paedophiles and assets of the Cult through corrupt and Cult-owned
social services which in the reframing era has hired many
psychopaths and emotionless automatons to do the job. Children are
ev en stolen to order using spurious reasons to take them by the
corrupt and secret (because they’ re corrupt) ‘family courts’. I hav e
wri en in detail in other books, starting with The Biggest Secret  in
1997, about the ubiquitous connections betw een the political,
corporate, gov ernment, intelligence and military elites (Cult
operativ es) and Satanism and paedophilia. If y ou go deep enough
both netw orks hav e an interlocking leadership. The W oke mentality
has been dev eloped by the Cult for many reasons: T o promote
almost ev ery aspect of its agenda; to hĳack the traditional political
le  and turn it fascist; to divide and rule; and to target agenda
pushbackers. But there are other reasons which relate to what I am
describing here. How many happy and joyful W okers do y ou ev er
see especially at the extreme end? They are a mental and
psychological mess consumed by emotional stress and constantly
emotionally cocked for the next explosion of indignation at someone
referring to a female as a female. They are w alking, talking, ba eries
as Morpheus might say emi ing frequencies which both enslav e
them in low-vibrational bubbles of perceptual limitation and feed
the Archons. Add to this the hatred claimed to be lov e; fascism
claimed to ‘anti-fascism’, racism claimed to be ‘anti-racism’;exclusion claimed to inclusion; and the abuse-ﬁlled Internet trolling.
Y ou hav e a purpose-built Archontic energy system with not a wind
turbine in sight and all founded on Archontic inversion . W e hav e
whole generations now manipulated to serv e the Archons with their
actions and energy . They will be doing so their entire adult liv es
unless they snap out of their Archon-induced trance. Is it really a
surprise that Cult billionaires and corporations put so much money
their w ay? Where is the energy of joy and laughter , including
laughing at y ourself which is conﬁrmation of y our own emotional
security? Mark T w ain said: ‘The human race has one really eﬀectiv e
w eapon, and that is laughter .‘ W e must use it all the time. W oke has
destroy ed comedy because it has no humour , no joy , sense of irony ,
or self-deprecation. Its energy is dense and intense. Mmmmm , lunch
says the Archontic frequency . Rudolf Steiner (1861-1925) w as the
Austrian philosopher and famous esoteric thinker who established
W aldorf education or Steiner schools to treat children like unique
expressions of consciousness and not minds to be programmed with
the perceptions determined by authority . I’ d been writing about this
energy v ampiring for decades when I w as sent in 2016 a quote by
Steiner . He w as spot on:
T h e r e  a r e  b e i n g s  i n  t h e  s p i r i t u a l  r e a l m s  f o r  w h o m  a n x i e t y  a n d  f e a r  e m a n a t i n g  f r o m  h u m a n
b e i n g s  o f f e r  w e l c o m e  f o o d .  W h e n  h u m a n s  h a v e  n o  a n x i e t y  a n d  f e a r ,  t h e n  t h e s e  c r e a t u r e s
s t a r v e .  I f  f e a r  a n d  a n x i e t y  r a d i a t e s  f r o m  p e o p l e  a n d  t h e y  b r e a k  o u t  i n  p a n i c ,  t h e n  t h e s e
c r e a t u r e s  f i n d  w e l c o m e  n u t r i t i o n  a n d  t h e y  b e c o m e  m o r e  a n d  m o r e  p o w e r f u l .  T h e s e  b e i n g s  a r e
h o s t i l e  t o w a r d s  h u m a n i t y .  E v e r y t h i n g  t h a t  f e e d s  o n  n e g a t i v e  f e e l i n g s ,  o n  a n x i e t y ,  f e a r  a n d
s u p e r s t i t i o n ,  d e s p a i r  o r  d o u b t ,  a r e  i n  r e a l i t y  h o s t i l e  f o r c e s  i n  s u p e r - s e n s i b l e  w o r l d s ,  l a u n c h i n g
c r u e l  a t t a c k s  o n  h u m a n  b e i n g s ,  w h i l e  t h e y  a r e  b e i n g  f e d  . . .  T h e s e  a r e  e x a c t l y  t h e  f e e l i n g s  t h a t
b e l o n g  t o  c o n t e m p o r a r y  c u l t u r e  a n d  m a t e r i a l i s m ;  b e c a u s e  i t  e s t r a n g e s  p e o p l e  f r o m  t h e
s p i r i t u a l  w o r l d ,  i t  i s  e s p e c i a l l y  s u i t e d  t o  e v o k e  h o p e l e s s n e s s  a n d  f e a r  o f  t h e  u n k n o w n  i n
p e o p l e ,  t h e r e b y  c a l l i n g  u p  t h e  a b o v e  m e n t i o n e d  h o s t i l e  f o r c e s  a g a i n s t  t h e m .
P ause for a moment from this perspectiv e and reﬂect on what has
happened in the w orld since the start of 2020. Not only will pennies
drop, but billion dollar bills. W e see the same theme from Don Juan
Matus, a Y aqui Indian shaman in Mexico and the information source
for P eruvian-born writer , Carlos Castaneda, who wrote a series ofbooks from the 1960s to 1990s. Don Juan described the force
manipulating human society and his name for the Archons w as the
predator:
W e  h a v e  a  p r e d a t o r  t h a t  c a m e  f r o m  t h e  d e p t h s  o f  t h e  c o s m o s  a n d  t o o k  o v e r  t h e  r u l e  o f  o u r
l i v e s .  H u m a n  b e i n g s  a r e  i t s  p r i s o n e r s .  T h e  p r e d a t o r  i s  o u r  l o r d  a n d  m a s t e r .  I t  h a s  r e n d e r e d  u s
d o c i l e ,  h e l p l e s s .  I f  w e  w a n t  t o  p r o t e s t ,  i t  s u p p r e s s e s  o u r  p r o t e s t .  I f  w e  w a n t  t o  a c t
i n d e p e n d e n t l y ,  i t  d e m a n d s  t h a t  w e  d o n ’ t  d o  s o  . . .  i n d e e d  w e  a r e  h e l d  p r i s o n e r !
T h e y  t o o k  u s  o v e r  b e c a u s e  w e  a r e  f o o d  t o  t h e m ,  a n d  t h e y  s q u e e z e  u s  m e r c i l e s s l y  b e c a u s e  w e
a r e  t h e i r  s u s t e n a n c e .  J u s t  a s  w e  r e a r  c h i c k e n s  i n  c o o p s ,  t h e  p r e d a t o r s  r e a r  u s  i n  h u m a n  c o o p s ,
h u m a n e r o s .  T h e r e f o r e ,  t h e i r  f o o d  i s  a l w a y s  a v a i l a b l e  t o  t h e m .
D i f f e r e n t  c u l t u r e s ,  d i f f e r e n t  e r a s ,  s a m e  r e c u r r i n g  t h e m e .
The ‘ennoia’ dilemma
Nag Hammadi Gnostic manuscripts say that Archon consciousness
has no ‘ennoia’. This is directly translated as ‘intentionality’, but I’ll
use the term ‘creativ e imagination’. The All That Is  in aw areness of
itself is the source of all creativity – all possibility – and the more
disconnected y ou are from that source the more y ou are
subsequently denied ‘creativ e imagination’. Giv en that Archon
consciousness is almost entirely disconnected it sev erely lacks
creativity and has to rely on far more mechanical processes of
thought and exploit the creativ e potential of those that do hav e
‘ennoia’. Y ou can see cases of this throughout human society . Archon
consciousness almost entirely dominates the global banking system
and if w e study how that system w orks y ou will appreciate what I
mean. Banks manifest ‘money’ out of nothing by issuing lines of
‘credit’ which is ‘money’ that has nev er , does not, and will nev er
exist except in theory . It’ s a conﬁdence trick. If y ou think ‘credit’
ﬁgures-on-a-screen ‘money’ is w orth anything y ou accept it as
payment. If y ou don’ t then the whole system collapses through lack
of conﬁdence in the v alue of that ‘money’. Archontic bankers with
no ‘ennoia’ are ‘lending’ ‘money’ that doesn’ t exist to humans that do
hav e creativity – those that hav e the inspired ideas and create
businesses and products. Archon banking feeds oﬀ human creativitywhich it controls through ‘money’ creation and debt. Humans hav e
the creativity and Archons exploit that for their own beneﬁt and
control while having none themselv es. Archon Internet platforms
like Facebook claim joint copyright of ev erything that creativ e users
post and while Archontic minds like Zuckerberg may oﬃcially head
that company it will be human creativ es on the staﬀ that provide the
creativ e inspiration. When y ou hav e limitless ‘money’ y ou can then
buy other companies established by creativ e humans. W itness the
acquisition record of Facebook, Google and their like. Surv ey the
Archon-controlled music industry and y ou see non-creativ e dark
suit executiv es making their fortune from the human creativity of
their artists. The cases are endless. Research the history of people
like Gates and Zuckerberg and how their empires w ere built on
exploiting the creativity of others. Archon minds cannot create out of
nothing, but they are skilled (because they hav e to be) in what
Gnostic texts call ‘countermimicry’. They can imitate, but not
innov ate. Sabbatians trawl the creativity of others through
backdoors they install in computer systems through their
cybersecurity systems. Archon-controlled China is globally infamous
for stealing intellectual property and I remember how Hong Kong,
now part of China, became notorious for making counterfeit copies
of the creativity of others – ‘countermimicry’. W ith the now
perv asiv e and all-seeing surv eillance systems able to inﬁltrate any
computer y ou can appreciate the potential for Archons to v ampire
the creativity of humans. Author John Lamb Lash wrote in his book
about the Nag Hammadi texts, Not In His Image :
A l t h o u g h  t h e y  c a n n o t  o r i g i n a t e  a n y t h i n g ,  b e c a u s e  t h e y  l a c k  t h e  d i v i n e  f a c t o r  o f  e n n o i a
( i n t e n t i o n a l i t y ) ,  A r c h o n s  c a n  i m i t a t e  w i t h  a  v e n g e a n c e .  T h e i r  e x p e r t i s e  i s  s i m u l a t i o n  ( H A L ,
v i r t u a l  r e a l i t y ) .  T h e  D e m i u r g e  [ Y a l d a b a o t h ]  f a s h i o n s  a  h e a v e n  w o r l d  c o p i e d  f r o m  t h e  f r a c t a l
p a t t e r n s  [ o f  t h e  o r i g i n a l ]  . . .  H i s  c o n s t r u c t i o n  i s  c e l e s t i a l  k i t s c h ,  l i k e  t h e  f a k e  I t a l i a n a t e  v i l l a  o f  a
M a f i a  d o n  c o m p l e t e  w i t h  m i l i t a n t  a n g e l s  t o  g u a r d  e v e r y  p o r t a l .
This brings us to something that I hav e been speaking about since
the turn of the millennium. Our reality is a simulation; a virtual
reality that w e think is real. No, I’ m not kidding.Human reality? Well, virtually
I had pondered for y ears about whether our reality is ‘real’ or some
kind of construct. I remembered being immensely aﬀected on a visit
as a small child in the late 1950s to the then newly-opened
Planetarium on the Marylebone Road in London which is now
closed and part of the adjacent Madame T ussauds w ax museum. It
w as in the middle of the day , but when the lights w ent out there w as
the night sky projected in the Planetarium’ s domed ceiling and it
appeared to be so real. The experience nev er le  me and I didn’ t
know why until around the turn of the millennium when I became
certain that our ‘night sky’ and entire reality is a projection, a virtual
reality , akin to the illusory w orld portray ed in the Matrix  movies. I
looked at the sky one day in this period and it appeared to me like
the domed roof of the Planetarium. The release of the ﬁrst Matrix
movie in 1999 also provided a synchronistic and perfect visual
representation of where my mind had been going for a long time. I
hadn’ t come across the Gnostic Nag Hammadi texts then. When I
did y ears later the correlation w as once again astounding. As I read
Gnostic accounts from 1,600 y ears and more earlier it w as clear that
they w ere describing the same simulation phenomenon. They tell
how the Y aldabaoth ‘Demiurge’ and Archons created a ‘bad copy’ of
original reality to rule ov er all that w ere captured by its illusions and
the body w as a prison to trap consciousness in the ‘bad copy’ fake
reality . Read how Gnostics describe the ‘bad copy’ and update that
to current times and they are referring to what w e w ould call today a
virtual reality simulation.
Author John Lamb Lash said ‘the Demiurge fashions a heav en
w orld copied from the fractal pa erns’ of the original through
expertise in ‘HAL ’ or virtual reality simulation. Fractal pa erns are
part of the energetic information construct of our reality , a sort of
blueprint. If these pa erns w ere copied in computer terms it w ould
indeed giv e y ou a copy of a ‘natural’ reality in a non-natural
frequency and digital form. The principle is the same as making a
copy of a w ebsite. The original w ebsite still exists, but now y ou can
change the copy v ersion to make it whatev er y ou like and it canbecome v ery diﬀerent to the original w ebsite. Archons hav e done
this with our reality , a synthetic  copy of prime reality that still exists
bey ond the frequency w alls of the simulation. T rapped within the
illusions of this synthetic Matrix, how ev er , w ere and are human
consciousness and other expressions of prime reality and this is why
the Archons via the Cult are seeking to make the human body
synthetic and giv e us synthetic AI minds to complete the job of
turning the entire reality synthetic including what w e perceiv e to be
the natural w orld. T o quote Kurzw eil: ‘Nanobots will infuse all the
ma er around us with information. Rocks, trees, ev erything will
become these intelligent creatures.’ Y es, synthetic  ‘creatures’ just as
‘Covid’ and other genetically-manipulating ‘v accines’ are designed
to make the human body synthetic. From this perspectiv e it is
obvious why Archons and their Cult are so desperate to infuse
synthetic material into ev ery human with their ‘Covid’ scam.
Let there be (electromagnetic) light
Y aldabaoth, the force that created the simulation, or Matrix, makes
sense of the Gnostic reference to ‘The Great Architect’ and its use by
Cult Freemasonry as the name of its deity . The designer of the Matrix
in the movies is called ‘The Architect’ and that trilogy is jam-packed
with symbolism relating to these subjects. I hav e contended for y ears
that the angry Old T estament God (Y aldabaoth) is the ‘God’ being
symbolically ‘quoted’ in the opening of Genesis as ‘creating the
w orld’. This is not the creation of prime reality – it’ s the creation of
the simulation . The Genesis ‘God’ says: ‘Let there be Light: and there
w as light.’ But what is this ‘Light’? I hav e said for decades that the
speed of light (186,000 miles per second) is not the fastest speed
possible as claimed by mainstream science and is in fact the
frequency w alls or outer limits of the Matrix. Y ou can’ t hav e a fastest
or slow est anything within all possibility when ev erything is
possible. The human body is encoded to operate within the speed of
light or within the simulation  and thus w e see only the tiny frequency
band of visible light . Near -death experiencers who perceiv e reality
outside the body during temporary ‘death’ describe a v ery diﬀerentform of light and this is supported by the Nag Hammadi texts.
Prime reality bey ond the simulation (‘Upper Aeons’ to the Gnostics)
is described as a realm of incredible beauty , bliss, lov e and harmony
– a realm of ‘w atery light’ that is so pow erful ‘there are no shadows’.
Our false reality of Archon control, which Gnostics call the ‘Low er
Aeons’, is depicted as a realm with a diﬀerent kind of ‘light’ and
described in terms of chaos, ‘Hell’, ‘the Abyss’ and ‘Outer Darkness’,
where trapped souls are tormented and manipulated by demons
(relate that to the ‘Covid’ hoax alone). The w atery light theme can be
found in near -death accounts and it is not the same as simulation
‘light’ which is electromagnetic or radiation light within the speed of
light – the ‘Low er Aeons’. Simulation ‘light’ is the ‘luminous ﬁre’
associated by Gnostics with the Archons. The Bible refers to
Y aldabaoth as ‘that old serpent, called the Devil, and Satan, which
deceiv eth the whole w orld’ (Rev elation 12:9). I think that making a
simulated copy of prime reality (‘countermimicry’) and changing it
dramatically while all the time manipulating humanity to believ e it
to be real could probably meet the criteria of deceiving the whole
w orld. Then w e come to the Cult god Lucifer – the Light Bringer .
Lucifer is symbolic of Y aldabaoth, the bringer of radiation light that
forms the bad copy simulation within the speed of light. ‘He’ is
symbolised by the lighted torch held by the Statue of Liberty and in
the name ‘Illuminati’. Sabbatian-Frankism declares that Lucifer is the
true god and Lucifer is the real god of Freemasonry honoured as
their ‘Great or Grand Architect of the Univ erse’ (simulation).
I w ould emphasise, too, the w ay Archontic technologically-
generated luminous ﬁre of radiation has deluged our environment
since I w as a kid in the 1950s and changed the nature of The Field
with which w e constantly interact. Through that interaction
technological radiation is changing us. The Smart Grid is designed to
operate with immense lev els of communication pow er with 5G
expanding across the w orld and 6G, 7G, in the process of
dev elopment. Radiation is the simulation and the Archontic
manipulation system. Why w ouldn’ t the Archon Cult wish to
unleash radiation upon us to an ev er -greater extreme to formKurzw eil’ s ‘cloud’? The plan for a synthetic human is related to the
need to cope with lev els of radiation bey ond ev en anything w e’v e
seen so far . Biological humans w ould not surviv e the scale of
radiation they hav e in their script. The Smart Grid is a technological
sub-reality within the technological simulation to further disconnect
ﬁv e-sense perception from expanded consciousness. It’ s a
technological prison of the mind.
Infusing the ‘spirit of darkness’
A recurring theme in religion and nativ e cultures is the
manipulation of human genetics by a non-human force and most
famously recorded as the biblical ‘sons of god’ (the god s  plural in the
original) who interbred with the daughters of men. The Nag
Hammadi Apocryphon of John  tells the same story this w ay:
H e  [ Y a l d a b a o t h ]  s e n t  h i s  a n g e l s  [ A r c h o n s / d e m o n s ]  t o  t h e  d a u g h t e r s  o f  m e n ,  t h a t  t h e y  m i g h t
t a k e  s o m e  o f  t h e m  f o r  t h e m s e l v e s  a n d  r a i s e  o f f s p r i n g  f o r  t h e i r  e n j o y m e n t .  A n d  a t  f i r s t  t h e y  d i d
n o t  s u c c e e d .  W h e n  t h e y  h a d  n o  s u c c e s s ,  t h e y  g a t h e r e d  t o g e t h e r  a g a i n  a n d  t h e y  m a d e  a  p l a n
t o g e t h e r  . . .  A n d  t h e  a n g e l s  c h a n g e d  t h e m s e l v e s  i n  t h e i r  l i k e n e s s  i n t o  t h e  l i k e n e s s  o f  t h e i r
m a t e s ,  f i l l i n g  t h e m  w i t h  t h e  s p i r i t  o f  d a r k n e s s ,  w h i c h  t h e y  h a d  m i x e d  f o r  t h e m ,  a n d  w i t h  e v i l  . . .
A n d  t h e y  t o o k  w o m e n  a n d  b e g o t  c h i l d r e n  o u t  o f  t h e  d a r k n e s s  a c c o r d i n g  t o  t h e  l i k e n e s s  o f
t h e i r  s p i r i t .
P ossession when a discarnate entity takes ov er a human body is an
age-old theme and continues today . It’ s v ery real and I’v e seen it.
Satanic and secret society rituals can create an energetic environment
in which entities can a ach to initiates and I’v e heard many stories
of how people hav e changed their personality a er being initiated
ev en into low er lev els of the Freemasons. I hav e been inside three
Freemasonic temples, one at a public open day and tw o by just
w alking in when there w as no one around to stop me. They w ere in
R yde, the town where I liv e, Birmingham, England, when I w as with
a group, and Boston, Massachuse s. They all felt the same
energetically – dark, dense, low-vibrational and sinister . Demonic
a achment can happen while the initiate has no idea what is going
on. T o them it’ s just a ritual to get in the Masons and do a bit of goodbusiness. In the far more extreme rituals of Satanism human
possession is ev en more pow erful and they are designed to make
possession possible. The hierarchy of the Cult is dictated by the
pow er and perceiv ed status of the possessing Archon. In this w ay
the Archon hierarchy becomes the Cult hierarchy . Once the entity
has a ached it can inﬂuence perception and behaviour and if it
a aches to the extreme then so much of its energy (information)
infuses into the body information ﬁeld that the hologram starts to
reﬂect the nature of the possessing entity . This is the Exorcist  movie
type of possession when facial features change and it’ s known as
shapeshi ing. Islam’ s Jinn are said to be invisible tricksters who
change shape, ‘whisper ’, confuse and take human form. These are all
traits of the Archons and other v ersions of the same phenomenon.
Extreme possession could certainty infuse the ‘spirit of darkness’
into a partner during sex as the Nag Hammadi texts appear to
describe. Such an infusion can change genetics which is also
energetic information. Human genetics is information and the ‘spirit
of darkness’ is information. Mix one with the other and change must
happen. Islam has the concept of a ‘Jinn baby’ through possession of
the mother and by Jinn taking human form. There are many w ays
that human genetics can be changed and remember that Archons
hav e been aw are all along of adv anced techniques to do this. What is
being done in human society today – and far more – w as known
about by Archons at the time of the ‘fallen ones’ and their other
v ersions described in religions and cultures.
Archons and their human-w orld Cult are obsessed with genetics
as w e see today and they know this dictates how information is
processed into perceiv ed reality during a human life. They needed to
produce a human form that w ould decode the simulation and this is
symbolically known as ‘ Adam and Ev e’ who le  the ‘garden’ (prime
reality) and ‘fell’ into Matrix reality . The simulation is not a
‘physical’ construct (there is no ‘physical’); it is a source of
information. Think W i-Fi again. The simulation is an energetic ﬁeld
encoded with information and body-brain systems are designed to
decode that information encoded in w av e or frequency form whichis transmi ed to the brain as electrical signals. These are decoded by
the brain to construct our sense of reality – an illusory ‘physical’
w orld that only exists in the brain or the mind. V irtual reality games
mimic this process using the same sensory decoding system.
Information is fed to the senses to decode a virtual reality that can
appear so real, but isn’ t (Figs 18 and 19). Some scientists believ e –
and I agree with them – that what w e perceiv e as ‘physical’ reality
only exists when w e are looking or observing. The act of perception
or focus triggers the decoding systems which turn w av eform
information into holographic reality . When w e are not observing
something our reality rev erts from a holographic state to a w av eform
state. This relates to the same principle as a falling tree not making a
noise unless someone is there to hear it or decode it. The concept
makes sense from the simulation perspectiv e. A computer is not
decoding all the information in a W i-Fi ﬁeld all the time and only
decodes or brings into reality on the screen that part of W i-Fi that it’ s
decoding – focusing upon – at that moment.
Figure 18:  V i r t u a l  r e a l i t y  t e c h n o l o g y  ‘ h a c k s ’  i n t o  t h e  b o d y ’ s  f i v e - s e n s e  d e c o d i n g  s y s t e m .
Figure 19:  T h e  r e s u l t  c a n  b e  e x p e r i e n c e d  a s  v e r y  ‘ r e a l ’ .Interestingly , Professor Donald Hoﬀman at the Department of
Cognitiv e Sciences at the Univ ersity of California, Irvine, says that
our experienced reality is like a computer interface that shows us
only the lev el with which w e interact while hiding all that exists
bey ond it: ‘Ev olution shaped us with a user interface that hides the
truth. Nothing that w e see is the truth – the v ery language of space
and time and objects is the wrong language to describe reality .’ He is
correct in what he says on so many lev els. Space and time are not a
univ ersal reality . They are a phenomenon of decoded simulation
reality as part of the process of enslaving our sense of reality . Near -
death experiencers report again and again how space and time did
not exist as w e perceiv e them once they w ere free of the body – body
decoding systems. Y ou can appreciate from this why Archons and
their Cult are so desperate to entrap human a ention in the ﬁv e
senses where w e are in the Matrix and of the Matrix. Opening y our
mind to expanded states of aw areness takes y ou bey ond the
information conﬁnes of the simulation and y ou become aw are of
knowledge and insights denied to y ou before. This is what w e call
‘aw akening’ – awakening from the Matrix  – and in the ﬁnal chapter I
will relate this to current ev ents.
Where are the ‘aliens’?
A simulation w ould explain the so-called ‘Fermi P aradox’ named
a er Italian physicist Enrico Fermi (1901-1954) who created the ﬁrst
nuclear reactor . He considered the question of why there is such a
lack of extraterrestrial activity when there are so many stars and
planets in an apparently v ast univ erse; but what if the night sky that
w e see, or think w e do, is a simulated projection as I say? If y ou
control the simulation and y our aim is to hold humanity fast in
essential ignorance w ould y ou w ant other forms of life including
adv anced life coming and going sharing information with
humanity? Or w ould y ou w ant them to believ e they w ere isolated
and apparently alone? Themes of human isolation and apartness are
common whether they be the perception of a lifeless univ erse or the
fascist isolation laws of the ‘Covid’ era. P aradoxically the v eryexistence of a simulation means that w e are not alone when some
force had to construct it. My view is that experiences that people
hav e reported all ov er the w orld for centuries with Reptilians and
Grey entities are Archon phenomena as Nag Hammadi texts
describe; and that benev olent ‘alien’ interactions are non-human
groups that come in and out of the simulation by ov ercoming
Archon a empts to keep them out. It should be highlighted, too, that
Reptilians and Greys are obsessed with genetics  and technology  as
related by cultural accounts and those who say they hav e been
abducted by them. T echnology is their w ay of ov ercoming some of
the limitations in their creativ e potential and our technology-driv en
and controlled human society of today is arch etypical Archon-
Reptilian-Grey modus operandi. T echnocracy is really Archon tocracy .
The Univ erse does not hav e to be as big as it appears with a
simulation. There is no space or distance only information decoded
into holographic reality . What w e call ‘space’ is only the absence of
holographic ‘objects’ and that ‘space’ is The Field of energetic
information which connects ev erything into a single whole. The
same applies with the artiﬁcially-generated information ﬁeld of the
simulation. The Univ erse is not big or small as a physical reality . It is
decoded information, that’ s all, and its perceiv ed size is decided by
the w ay the simulation is encoded to make it appear . The entire
night sky as w e perceiv e it only exists in our brain and so where are
those ‘millions of light y ears’? The ‘stars’ on the ceiling of the
Planetarium looked a v ast distance aw ay .
There’ s another point to mention about ‘aliens’. I hav e been
highlighting since the 1990s the plan to stage a fake ‘alien inv asion’
to justify the centralisation of global pow er and a w orld military .
Nazi scientist W erner v on Braun, who w as taken to America by
Operation P aperclip a er W orld W ar T w o to help found NASA, told
his American assistant Dr Carol Rosin about the Cult agenda when
he knew he w as dying in 1977. Rosin said that he told her about a
sequence that w ould lead to total human control by a one-w orld
gov ernment. This included threats from terrorism, rogue nations,
meteors and asteroids before ﬁnally an ‘alien inv asion’. All of thesethings, v on Braun said, w ould be bogus and what I w ould refer to as
a No-Problem-Reaction-Solution. Keep this in mind when ‘the aliens
are coming’ is the new mantra. The aliens are not coming – they are
already here  and they hav e inﬁltrated human society while looking
human. French-Canadian inv estigativ e journalist Serge Monast said
in 1994 that he had uncov ered a NASA/military operation called
Project Blue Beam which ﬁts with what W erner v on Braun predicted.
Monast died of a ‘heart a ack’ in 1996 the day a er he w as arrested
and spent a night in prison. He w as 51. He said Blue Beam w as a
plan to stage an alien inv asion that w ould include religious ﬁgures
beamed holographically into the sky as part of a global manipulation
to usher in a ‘new age’ of w orshipping what I w ould say is the Cult
‘god’ Y aldabaoth in a one-w orld religion. Fake holographic asteroids
are also said to be part of the plan which again syncs with v on
Braun. How could y ou stage an illusory threat from asteroids unless
they w ere holographic inserts? This is pre y straightforw ard giv en
the adv anced technology outside the public arena and the fact that
our ‘physical’ reality is holographic anyw ay . Information ﬁelds
w ould be projected and w e w ould decode them into the illusion of a
‘physical’ asteroid. If they can sell a global ‘pandemic’ with a ‘virus’
that doesn’ t exist what will humans not believ e if gov ernment and
media tell them?
All this is particularly relev ant as I write with the P entagon
planning to release in June, 2021, information about ‘UFO sightings’.
I hav e been following the UFO story since the early 1990s and the
common theme throughout has been gov ernment and military
denials and cov er up. More recently , how ev er , the P entagon has
suddenly become more talkativ e and apparently open with Air
Force pilot radar images released of unexplained cra  moving and
changing direction at speeds w ell bey ond anything believ ed possible
with human technology . Then, in March, 2021, former Director of
National Intelligence John Ratcliﬀe said a P entagon report months
later in June w ould rev eal a great deal of information about UFO
sightings unknown to the public. He said the report w ould hav e
‘massiv e implications’. The order to do this w as included bizarrelyin a $2.3 trillion ‘coronavirus’ relief and gov ernment funding bill
passed by the T rump administration at the end of 2020. I w ould add
some serious notes of caution here. I hav e been pointing out since
the 1990s that the US military and intelligence netw orks hav e long
had cra  – ‘ﬂying saucers’ or anti-gravity cra  – which any observ er
w ould take to be extraterrestrial in origin. Keeping this knowledge
from the public allows cra  ﬂown by humans  to be perceiv ed as alien
visitations. I am not saying that ‘aliens’ do not exist. I w ould be the
last one to say that, but w e hav e to be streetwise here. President
Ronald Reagan told the UN General Assembly in 1987: ‘I
occasionally think how quickly our diﬀerences w orldwide w ould
v anish if w e w ere facing an alien threat from outside this w orld.’
That’ s the idea. Unite against a common ‘enemy’ with a common
purpose behind y our ‘saviour force’ (the Cult) as this age-old
technique of mass manipulation goes global.
Science moves this way …
I could ﬁnd only one other person who w as discussing the
simulation hypothesis publicly when I concluded it w as real. This
w as Nick Bostrom, a Sw edish-born philosopher at the Univ ersity of
Oxford, who has explored for many y ears the possibility that human
reality is a computer simulation although his v ersion and mine are
not the same. T oday the simulation and holographic reality
hypothesis hav e increasingly entered the scientiﬁc mainstream. W ell,
the more open-minded mainstream, that is. Here are a few of the
ev er -gathering examples. American nuclear physicist Silas Beane led
a team of physicists at the Univ ersity of Bonn in Germany pursuing
the question of whether w e liv e in a simulation. They concluded that
w e probably do and it w as likely based on a la ice of cubes. They
found that cosmic rays align with that speciﬁc pa ern. The team
highlighted the Greisen–Zatsepin–Kuzmin (GZK) limit which refers
to cosmic ray particle interaction with cosmic background radiation
that creates an apparent boundary for cosmic ray particles. They say
in a paper entitled ‘Constraints on the Univ erse as a Numerical
Simulation’ that this ‘pa ern of constraint’ is exactly what y ouw ould ﬁnd with a computer simulation. They also made the point
that a simulation w ould create its own ‘laws of physics’ that w ould
limit possibility . I’v e been making the same point for decades that
the perceived  laws of physics relate only to this reality , or what I
w ould later call the simulation. When designers write codes to create
computer and virtual reality games they are the equiv alent of the
laws of physics for that game. Play ers interact within the limitations
laid out by the coding. In the same w ay those who wrote the codes
for the simulation decided the laws of physics that w ould apply .
These can be ov erridden by expanded states of consciousness, but
not by those enslav ed in only ﬁv e-sense aw areness where simulation
codes rule. Ov erriding the codes is what people call ‘miracles’. They
are not. They are bypassing the encoded limits of the simulation. A
population caught in simulation perception w ould hav e no idea that
this w as their plight. As the Bonn paper said: ‘Like a prisoner in a
pitch-black cell w e w ould not be able to see the “w alls” of our
prison,’ That’ s true if people remain mesmerised by the ﬁv e senses.
Open to expanded aw areness and those w alls become v ery clear . The
main one is the speed of light.
American theoretical physicist James Gates is another who has
explored the simulation question and found considerable evidence
to support the idea. Gates w as Professor of Physics at the Univ ersity
of Maryland, Director of The Center for String and P article Theory ,
and on Barack Obama’ s Council of Advisors on Science and
T echnology . He and his team found computer codes  of digital data
embedded in the fabric of our reality . They relate to on-oﬀ electrical
charges of 1 and 0 in the binary system used by computers. ‘W e hav e
no idea what they are doing there’, Gates said. They found within
the energetic fabric mathematical sequences known as error -
correcting codes or block codes that ‘reboot’ data to its original state
or ‘default se ings’ when something knocks it out of sync. Gates w as
asked if he had found a set of equations embedded in our reality
indistinguishable from those that driv e search engines and browsers
and he said: ‘That is correct.’ Rich T errile, director of the Centre for
Ev olutionary Computation and Automated Design at NASA ’ s JetPropulsion Laboratory , has said publicly that he believ es the
Univ erse is a digital hologram that must hav e been created by a form
of intelligence. I agree with that in ev ery w ay . W av eform information
is deliv ered electrically by the senses to the brain which constructs a
digital  holographic reality that w e call the ‘w orld’. This digital lev el
of reality can be read by the esoteric art of numerology . Digital
holograms are at the cu ing edge of holographics today . W e hav e
digital technology ev erywhere designed to access and manipulate
our digital lev el of perceiv ed reality . Synthetic mRNA in ‘Covid
v accines’ has a digital component to manipulate the body’ s digital
‘operating system’.
Reality is numbers
How many know that our reality can be broken down to numbers
and codes that are the same as computer games? Max T egmark, a
physicist at the Massachuse s Institute of T echnology (MIT), is the
author of Our Mathematical Universe  in which he lays out how reality
can be entirely described by numbers and maths in the w ay that a
video game is encoded with the ‘physics’ of computer games. Our
w orld and computer virtual reality are essentially the same.
T egmark imagines the perceptions of characters in an adv anced
computer game when the graphics are so good they don’ t know they
are in a game. They think they can bump into real objects
(electromagnetic resistance in our reality), fall in lov e and feel
emotions like excitement. When they began to study the apparently
‘physical w orld’ of the video game they w ould realise that
ev erything w as made of pixels (which hav e been found in our
energetic reality as must be the case when on one lev el our w orld is
digital). What computer game characters thought w as physical
‘stuﬀ ’, T egmark said, could actually be broken down into numbers:
A n d  w e ’ r e  e x a c t l y  i n  t h i s  s i t u a t i o n  i n  o u r  w o r l d .  W e  l o o k  a r o u n d  a n d  i t  d o e s n ’ t  s e e m  t h a t
m a t h e m a t i c a l  a t  a l l ,  b u t  e v e r y t h i n g  w e  s e e  i s  m a d e  o u t  o f  e l e m e n t a r y  p a r t i c l e s  l i k e  q u a r k s  a n d
e l e c t r o n s .  A n d  w h a t  p r o p e r t i e s  d o e s  a n  e l e c t r o n  h a v e ?  D o e s  i t  h a v e  a  s m e l l  o r  a  c o l o u r  o r  a
t e x t u r e ?  N o !  . . .  W e  p h y s i c i s t s  h a v e  c o m e  u p  w i t h  g e e k y  n a m e s  f o r  [ E l e c t r o n ]  p r o p e r t i e s ,  l i k ee l e c t r i c  c h a r g e ,  o r  s p i n ,  o r  l e p t o n  n u m b e r ,  b u t  t h e  e l e c t r o n  d o e s n ’ t  c a r e  w h a t  w e  c a l l  i t ,  t h e
p r o p e r t i e s  a r e  j u s t  n u m b e r s .
This is the illusory reality Gnostics w ere describing. This is the
simulation. The A, C, G, and T codes of DNA hav e a binary v alue –
A and C = 0 while G and T = 1. This has to be when the simulation is
digital and the body must be digital to interact with it. Recurring
mathematical sequences are encoded throughout reality and the
body . They include the Fibonacci sequence in which the tw o
previous numbers are added to get the next one, as in ... 1, 1, 2, 3, 5,
8, 13, 21, 34, 55, etc. The sequence is encoded in the human face and
body , proportions of animals, DNA, seed heads, pine cones, trees,
shells, spiral galaxies, hurricanes and the number of petals in a
ﬂow er . The list goes on and on. There are fractal pa erns – a ‘nev er -
ending pa ern that is inﬁnitely complex and self-similar across all
scales in the as abov e, so below , principle of holograms. These and
other famous recurring geometrical and mathematical sequences
such as Phi, Pi, Golden Mean, Golden Ratio and Golden Section are
computer codes  of the simulation. I had to laugh and giv e my head a
shake the day I ﬁnished this book and it w ent into the production
stage. I w as sent an article in Scientific American  published in April,
2021, with the headline ‘Conﬁrmed! W e Liv e in a Simulation’. T w o
decades a er I ﬁrst said our reality is a simulation and the speed of
light is it’ s outer limit the article suggested that w e do liv e in a
simulation and that the speed of light is its outer limit. I le  school at
15 and nev er passed a major exam in my life while the writer w as up
to his ey es in qualiﬁcations. As I will explain in the ﬁnal chapter
knowing  is far be er than thinking and they come from v ery diﬀerent
sources. The article rightly connected the speed of light to the
processing speed of the ‘Matrix’ and said what has been in my books
all this time … ‘If w e are in a simulation, as it appears, then space is
an abstract property wri en in code. It is not real’. No it’ s not and if
w e liv e in a simulation something created it and it w asn’ t us . ‘That
David Icke says w e are manipulated by aliens’ – he’ s crackers.’Wow …
The reality that humanity thinks is so real is an illusion. P oliticians,
gov ernments, scientists, doctors, academics, law enforcement,
media, school and univ ersity curriculums, on and on, are all
founded on a w orld that does not exist  except as a simulated prison
cell. Is it such a stretch to accept that ‘Covid’ doesn’ t exist when our
entire ‘physical’ reality doesn’ t exist? Rev ealed here is the
knowledge kept under raps in the Cult netw orks of
compartmentalised secrecy to control humanity’ s sense of reality by
inducing the population to believ e in a reality that’ s not real. If it
w asn’ t so tragic in its experiential consequences the whole thing
w ould be hysterically funny . None of this is new to Renegade Minds.
Ancient Greek philosopher Plato (about 428 to about 347BC) w as a
major inﬂuence on Gnostic belief and he described the human plight
thousands of y ears ago with his Allegory of the Cav e. He told the
symbolic story of prisoners living in a cav e who had nev er been
outside. They w ere chained and could only see one w all of the cav e
while behind them w as a ﬁre that they could not see. Figures w alked
past the ﬁre casting shadows on the prisoners’ w all and those
moving shadows became their sense of reality . Some prisoners began
to study the shadows and w ere considered experts on them (today’ s
academics and scientists), but what they studied w as only an illusion
(today’ s academics and scientists). A prisoner escaped from the cav e
and saw reality as it really is. When he returned to report this
rev elation they didn’ t believ e him, called him mad and threatened to
kill him if he tried to set them free. Plato’ s tale is not only a brilliant
analogy of the human plight and our illusory reality . It describes,
too, the dynamics of the ‘Covid’ hoax. I hav e only skimmed the
surface of these subjects here. The aim of this book is to crisply
connect all essential dots to put what is happening today into its true
context. All subject areas and their connections in this chapter are
cov ered in great evidential detail in Everything You Need To Know,
But Have Never Been Told  and The Answer .
They say that bewildered people ‘can’ t see the forest for the trees’.
Humanity , how ev er , can’ t see the forest for the twigs . The ﬁv e sensessee only twigs while Renegade Minds can see the forest and it’ s the
forest where the answ ers lie with the connections that rev eals.
Breaking free of perceptual programming so the forest can be seen is
the w ay w e turn all this around. Not breaking free is how humanity
got into this mess. The situation may seem hopeless, but I promise
y ou it’ s not. W e are a perceptual heartbeat from paradise if only w e
knew .RCHAPTER TWELVE
Escaping Wetiko
Life is simply a vacation from the infinite
Dean Cavanagh
enegade Minds w eav e the w eb of life and ev ents and see
common themes in the apparently random. They are alw ays
there if y ou look for them and their pursuit is aided by incredible
synchronicity that comes when y our mind is open rather than
mesmerised by what it thinks it can see.
Inﬁnite aw areness is inﬁnite possibility and the more of inﬁnite
possibility that w e access the more becomes inﬁnitely possible. That
may be stating the apparently obvious, but it is a dev astatingly-
pow erful fact that can set us free. W e are a point of a ention within
an inﬁnity of consciousness. The question is how much of that
inﬁnity do w e choose to access? How much knowledge, insight,
aw areness, wisdom, do w e w ant to connect with and explore? If
y our focus is only in the ﬁv e senses y ou will be inﬂuenced by a
fraction of inﬁnite aw areness. I mean a range so tiny that it giv es
new meaning to inﬁnitesimal. Limitation of self-identity and a sense
of the possible limit accordingly y our range of consciousness. W e are
what w e think w e are. Life is what w e think it is. The dream is the
dreamer and the dreamer is the dream. Buddhist philosophy puts it
this w ay: ‘ As a thing is view ed, so it appears.’ Most humans liv e in
the realm of touch, taste, see, hear , and smell and that’ s the limit of
their sense of the possible and sense of self. Many will follow a
religion and speak of a God in his heav en, but their liv es are stilldominated by the ﬁv e senses in their perceptions and actions. The
ﬁv e senses become the arbiter of ev erything. When that happens all
except a smear of inﬁnity is sealed aw ay from inﬂuence by the rigid,
unyielding, reality bubbles that are the ﬁv e-sense human or
Phantom Self. Archon Cult methodology is to isolate consciousness
within ﬁv e-sense reality – the simulation – and then program that
consciousness with a sense of self and the w orld through a deluge of
life-long information designed to instil the desired perception that
allows global control. Eﬀorts to do this hav e increased dramatically
with identity politics as identity bubbles are squeezed into the
minutiae of ﬁv e-sense detail which disconnect people ev en more
profoundly from the inﬁnite ‘I’.
Fiv e-sense focus and self-identity are like a ﬁrew all that limits
access to the inﬁnite realms. Y ou only perceiv e one radio or
television station and no other . W e’ll take that literally for a moment.
Imagine a v ast array of stations giving diﬀerent information and
angles on reality , but y ou only ev er listen to one. Here w e hav e the
human plight in which the population is ov erwhelmingly conﬁned
to CultFM. This relates only to the frequency range of CultFM and
limits perception and insight to that band – limits possibility  to that
band. It means y ou are connecting with an almost imperceptibly
minuscule range of possibility and creativ e potential within the
inﬁnite Field. It’ s a w orld where ev erything seems apart from
ev erything else and where synchronicity is rare. Synchronicity is
deﬁned in the dictionary as ‘the happening by chance of tw o or more
related or similar ev ents at the same time‘. Use of ‘by chance’ betrays
a complete misunderstanding of reality . Synchronicity is not ‘by
chance’. As people open their minds, or ‘aw aken’ to use the term,
they notice more and more coincidences in their liv es, bits of ‘luck’,
apparently miraculous happenings that put them in the right place
at the right time with the right people. Days become peppered with
‘fancy meeting y ou here’ and ‘what are the chances of that?’ My
entire life has been liv ed like this and ev er more so since my own
colossal aw akening in 1990 and 91 which transformed my sense of
reality . Synchronicity is not ‘by chance’; it is by accessing expandedrealms of possibility which allow expanded potential for
manifestation. P eople broadcasting the same vibe from the same
openness of mind tend to be drawn ‘by chance’ to each other
through what I call frequency magnetism and it’ s not only people. In
the last more than 30 y ears incredible synchronicity has also led me
through the Cult maze to information in so many forms and to
crucial personal experiences. These ‘coincidences’ hav e allow ed me
to put the puzzle pieces together across an enormous array of
subjects and situations. Those who hav e breached the bubble of ﬁv e-
sense reality will know exactly what I mean and this escape from the
perceptual prison cell is open to ev ery one whenev er they make that
choice. This may appear super -human when compared with the
limitations of ‘human’, but it’ s really our natural state. ‘Human’ as
currently experienced is consciousness in an unnatural state of
induced separation from the inﬁnity of the whole. I’ll come to how
this transformation into unity can be made when I hav e described in
more detail the force that holds humanity in servitude by denying
this access to inﬁnite self.
The Wetiko factor
I hav e been talking and writing for decades about the w ay ﬁv e-sense
mind is systematically barricaded from expanded aw areness. I hav e
used the analogy of a computer (ﬁv e-sense mind) and someone at
the keyboard (expanded aw areness). Interaction betw een the
computer and the operator is symbolic of the interaction betw een
ﬁv e-sense mind and expanded aw areness. The computer directly
experiences the Internet and the operator experiences the Internet
via the computer which is how it’ s supposed to be – the tw o w orking
as one. Archons seek to control that point where the operator
connects with the computer to stop that interaction ( Fig 20 ). Now the
operator is banging the keyboard and clicking the mouse, but the
computer is not responding and this happens when the computer is
taken ov er – possessed  – by an appropriately-named computer ‘virus’.
The operator has lost all inﬂuence ov er the computer which goes its
own w ay making decisions under the control of the ‘virus’. I hav ejust described the dynamic through which the force known to
Gnostics as Y aldabaoth and Archons disconnects ﬁv e-sense mind
from expanded aw areness to imprison humanity in perceptual
servitude.
Figure 20: The mind ‘virus’ I have been writing about for decades seeks to isolate five-sense
mind (the computer) from the true ‘I’. (Image by Neil Hague).
About a y ear ago I came across a Nativ e American concept of
W etiko which describes precisely the same phenomenon. W etiko is
the spelling used by the Cree and there are other v ersions including
wintiko and windigo used by other tribal groups. They spell the
name with low er case, but I see W etiko as a proper noun as with
Archons and prefer a capital. I ﬁrst saw an article about W etiko by
writer and researcher P aul Levy which so synced with what I had
been writing about the computer/operator disconnection and later
the Archons. I then read his book, the fascinating Dispelling Wetiko,
Breaking the Spell of Evil . The parallels betw een what I had concluded
long before and the Nativ e American concept of W etiko w ere so
clear and obvious that it w as almost funny . For W etiko see the
Gnostic Archons for sure and the Jinn, the Predators, and ev ery
other name for a force of evil, inv ersion and chaos. W etiko is the
Nativ e American name for the force that divides the computer fromthe operator ( Fig 21 ). Indigenous author Jack D. Forbes, a founder of
the Nativ e American mov ement in the 1960s, wrote another book
about W etiko entitled Columbus And Other Cannibals – The Wetiko
Disease of Exploitation, Imperialism, and Terrorism  which I also read.
Forbes says that W etiko refers to an evil person or spirit ‘who
terrorizes other creatures by means of terrible acts, including
cannibalism’. Zulu shaman Credo Mutw a told me that African
accounts tell how cannibalism w as brought into the w orld by the
Chitauri ‘gods’ – another manifestation of W etiko. The distinction
betw een ‘evil person or spirit’ relates to Archons/W etiko possessing
a human or acting as pure consciousness. W etiko is said to be a
sickness of the soul or spirit and a state of being that takes but giv es
nothing back – the Cult and its operativ es perfectly described. Black
Hawk, a Nativ e American w ar leader defending their lands from
conﬁscation, said European inv aders had ‘poisoned hearts’ – W etiko
hearts – and that this w ould spread to nativ e societies. Mention of
the heart is v ery signiﬁcant as w e shall shortly see. Forbes writes:
‘T ragically , the history of the w orld for the past 2,000 y ears is, in
great part, the story of the epidemiology of the w etiko disease.’ Y es,
and much longer . Forbes is correct when he says: ‘The w etikos
destroy ed Egypt and Babylon and Athens and Rome and
T enochtitlan [capital of the Aztec empire] and perhaps now they will
destroy the entire earth.’ Evil, he said, is the number one export of a
W etiko culture – see its globalisation with ‘Covid’. Constant w ar ,
mass murder , suﬀering of all kinds, child abuse, Satanism, torture
and human sacriﬁce are all expressions of W etiko and the W etiko
possessed. The w orld is W etiko made manifest, but it doesn’t have to
be . There is a w ay out of this ev en now .Figure 21: The mind ‘virus’ is known to Native Americans as ‘Wetiko’. (Image by Neil Hague).
Cult of Wetiko
W etiko is the Y aldabaoth frequency distortion that seeks to a ach to
human consciousness and absorb it into its own. Once this
connection is made W etiko can driv e the perceptions of the target
which they believ e to be coming from their own mind. All the
horrors of history and today from mass killers to Satanists,
paedophiles like Jeﬀrey Epstein and other psychopaths, are the
embodiment of W etiko and express its state of being in all its
grotesqueness. The Cult is W etiko incarnate, Y aldabaoth incarnate,
and it seeks to facilitate W etiko assimilation of humanity in totality
into its distortion by manipulating the population into low
frequency states that match its own. P aul Levy writes:
‘Holographically enforced within the psyche of ev ery human being
the w etiko virus perv ades and underlies the entire ﬁeld of
consciousness, and can therefore potentially manifest through any
one of us at any moment if w e are not mindful.’ The ‘Covid’ hoax
has achiev ed this with many people, but others hav e not fallen into
W etiko’ s frequency lair . Play ers in the ‘Covid’ human catastrophe
including Gates, Schw ab, T edros, Fauci, Whi y , V allance, Johnson,
Hancock, Ferguson, Drosten, and all the rest, including the
psychopath psychologists, are expressions of W etiko. This is whythey hav e no compassion or empathy and no emotional consequence
for what they do that w ould make them stop doing it. Observ e all
the people who support the psychopaths in authority against the
Pushbackers despite the damaging impact the psychopaths hav e on
their own liv es and their family’ s liv es. Y ou are again looking at
W etiko possession which prev ents them seeing through the lies to
the obvious scam going on. Why can’t they see it?  W etiko w on’ t let
them see it. The perceptual divide that has now become a chasm is
betw een the W etikoed and the non- W etikoed.
P aul Levy describes W etiko in the same w ay that I hav e long
described the Archontic force. They are the same distorted
consciousness operating across dimensions of reality: ‘… the subtle
body of w etiko is not located in the third dimension of space and
time, literally existing in another dimension … it is able to aﬀect
ordinary liv es by mysteriously interpenetrating into our three-
dimensional w orld.’ W etiko does this through its incarnate
representativ es in the Cult and by w eaving itself into The Field
which on our lev el of reality is the electromagnetic information ﬁeld
of the simulation or Matrix. More than that, the simulation is  W etiko
/ Y aldabaoth. Caleb Scharf, Director of Astrobiology at Columbia
Univ ersity , has speculated that ‘alien life’ could be so adv anced that
it has transcribed itself into the quantum realm to become what w e
call physics. He said intelligence indistinguishable from the fabric of
the Univ erse w ould solv e many of its greatest mysteries:
Perhaps hyper-advanced life isn’t just external. Perhaps it’s already all around. It is embedded
in what we perceive to be physics itself, from the root behaviour of particles and fields to the
phenomena of complexity and emergence ... In other words, life might not just be in the
equations. It might BE the equations [My emphasis].
Scharf said it is possible that ‘w e don’ t recognise adv anced life
because it forms an integral and unsuspicious part of what w e’v e
considered to be the natural w orld’. I agree. W etiko/Y aldabaoth is  the
simulation. W e are literally in the body of the beast. But that doesn’ t
mean it has to control us. W e all hav e the pow er to ov ercome W etikoinﬂuence and the Cult knows that. I doubt it sleeps too w ell because
it knows that.
Which Field?
This, I suggest, is how it all w orks. There are tw o Fields. One is the
ﬁerce electromagnetic light of the Matrix within the speed of light;
the other is the ‘w atery light’ of The Field bey ond the w alls of the
Matrix that connects with the Great Inﬁnity . Fiv e-sense mind and the
decoding systems of the body a ach us to the Field of Matrix light.
They hav e to or w e could not experience this reality . Fiv e-sense mind
sees only the Matrix Field of information while our expanded
consciousness is part of the Inﬁnity Field. When w e open our minds,
and most importantly our hearts, to the Inﬁnity Field w e hav e a
mission control which giv es us an expanded perspectiv e, a road
map, to understand the nature of the ﬁv e-sense w orld. If w e are
isolated only in ﬁv e-sense mind there is no mission control. W e’ re on
our own trying to understand a w orld that’ s constantly feeding us
information to ensure w e do not understand. P eople in this state can
feel ‘lost’ and bewildered with no direction or radar . Y ou can see
ev er more clearly those who are inﬂuenced by the Fields of Big
Inﬁnity or li le ﬁv e-sense mind simply by their views and behaviour
with regard to the ‘Covid’ hoax. W e hav e had this division
throughout known human history with the mass of the people on
one side and individuals who could see and intuit bey ond the w alls
of the simulation – Plato’ s prisoner who broke out of the cav e and
saw reality for what it is. Such people hav e alw ays been targeted by
W etiko/Archon-possessed authority , burned at the stake or
demonised as mad, bad and dangerous. The Cult today and its
global netw ork of ‘anti-hate’, ‘anti-fascist’ W oke groups are all
expressions of W etiko a acking those exposing the conspiracy ,
‘Covid’ lies and the ‘v accine’ agenda.
W oke as a whole is W etiko which explains its black and white
mentality and how at one it is with the W etiko-possessed Cult. P aul
Levy said: ‘T o be in this paradigm is to still be under the thrall of a
tw o-v alued logic – where things are either true or false – of aw etikoized mind.’ W etiko consciousness is in a permanent rage,
therefore so is W oke, and then there is W oke inv ersion and
contradiction. ‘ Anti-fascists’ act like fascists because fascists and  ‘anti-
fascists’ are both W etiko at w ork. P olitical parties act the same while
claiming to be diﬀerent for the same reason. Secret society and
satanic rituals are a aching initiates to W etiko and the cold, ruthless,
psychopathic mentality that secures the positions of pow er all ov er
the w orld is W etiko. Reframing ‘training programmes’ hav e the
same cumulativ e eﬀect of a aching W etiko and w e hav e their
graduates described as automatons and robots with a cold,
psychopathic, uncaring demeanour . They are all traits of W etiko
possession and look how many times they hav e been described in
this book and elsewhere with regard to personnel behind ‘Covid’
including the police and medical profession. Climbing the greasy
pole in any profession in a W etiko society requires traits of W etiko to
get there and that is particularly true of politics which is not about
fair competition and pre-eminence of ideas. It is founded on how
many backs y ou can stab and arses y ou can lick. This culminated in
the global ‘Covid’ coordination betw een the W etiko possessed who
pulled it oﬀ in all the diﬀerent countries without a trace of empathy
and compassion for their impact on humans. Our sight sense can see
only holographic form and not the Field which connects holographic
form. Therefore w e perceiv e ‘physical’ objects with ‘space’ in
betw een. In fact that ‘space’ is energy/consciousness operating on
multiple frequencies. One of them is W etiko and that connects the
Cult psychopaths, those who submit to the psychopaths, and those
who serv e the psychopaths in the media operations of the w orld.
W etiko is Gates. W etiko is the mask-w earing submissiv e. W etiko is
the fake journalist and ‘fact-checker ’. The W etiko Field is
coordinating the whole thing. Psychopaths, gofers, media
operativ es, ‘anti-hate’ hate groups, ‘fact-checkers’ and submissiv e
people w ork as one unit even without human coordination  because they
are a ached to the same  Field which is organising it all ( Fig 22 ). P aul
Levy is here describing how W etiko-possessed people are drawn
together and refuse to let any information breach their rigidperceptions. He w as writing long before ‘Covid’, but I think y ou will
recognise follow ers of the ‘Covid’ religion oh just a little bit :
People who are channelling the vibratory frequency of wetiko align with each other through
psychic resonance to reinforce their unspoken shared agreement so as to uphold their
deranged view of reality. Once an unconscious content takes possession of certain
individuals, it irresistibly draws them together by mutual attraction and knits them into groups
tied together by their shared madness that can easily swell into an avalanche of insanity.
A psychic epidemic is a closed system, which is to say that it is insular and not open to any
new information or informing influences from the outside world which contradict its fixed,
limited, and limiting perspective.
There w e hav e the W oke mind and the ‘Covid’ mind. Compatible
resonance draws the aw akening together , too, which is clearly
happening today .
Figure 22: The Wetiko Field from which the Cult pyramid and its personnel are made
manifest. (Image by Neil Hague).
Spiritual servitude
W etiko doesn’ t care about humans. It’ s not human; it just possesses
humans for its own ends and the eﬀect (depending on the scale ofpossession) can be anything from extreme psychopathy to
unquestioning obedience. W etiko’ s w orst nightmare is for human
consciousness to expand bey ond the simulation. Ev erything is
focussed on stopping that happening through control of
information, thus perception, thus frequency . The ‘education
system’, media, science, medicine, academia, are all geared to
maintaining humanity in ﬁv e-sense servitude as is the constant
stimulation of low-vibrational mental and emotional states (see
‘Covid’). W etiko seeks to dominate those subconscious spaces
betw een ﬁv e-sense perception and expanded consciousness where
the computer meets the operator . From these subconscious hiding
places W etiko speaks to us to trigger urges and desires that w e take
to be our own and manipulate us into anything from low-vibrational
to psychopathic states. Remember how Islam describes the Jinn as
invisible tricksters that ‘whisper ’ and confuse. W etiko is the origin of
the ‘trickster god’ theme that y ou ﬁnd in cultures all ov er the w orld.
Jinn, like the Archons, are W etiko which is terriﬁed of humans
aw akening and reconnecting with our true self for then its energy
source has gone. W ith that the feedback loop breaks betw een W etiko
and human perception that provides the energetic momentum on
which its v ery existence depends as a force of evil. Humans are both
its target and its source of surviv al, but only if w e are operating in
low-vibrational states of fear , hate, depression and the background
anxiety that most people suﬀer . W e are W etiko’ s target because w e
are its key to surviv al. It needs us, not the other w ay round. P aul
Levy writes:
A vampire has no intrinsic, independent, substantial existence in its own right; it only exists in
relation to us. The pathogenic, vampiric mind-parasite called wetiko is nothing in itself – not
being able to exist from its own side – yet it has a ‘virtual reality’ such that it can potentially
destroy our species …
…The fact that a vampire is not reflected by a mirror can also mean that what we need to see
is that there’s nothing, no-thing to see, other than ourselves. The fact that wetiko is the
expression of something inside of us means that the cure for wetiko is with us as well. The
critical issue is finding this cure within us and then putting it into effect.Evil begets evil because if evil does not constantly expand and
ﬁnd new sources of energetic sustenance its evil, its distortion , dies
with the assimilation into balance and harmony . Lov e is the garlic to
W etiko’ s v ampire. Evil, the absence of lov e, cannot exist in the
presence of lov e. I think I see a w ay out of here. I hav e emphasised
so many times ov er the decades that the Archons/W etiko and their
Cult are not all pow erful. They are not . I don’ t care how it looks ev en
now they are not . I hav e not called them li le boys in short trousers
for eﬀect. I hav e said it because it is true. W etiko’ s insatiable desire
for pow er ov er others is not a sign of its omnipotence, but its
insecurity . P aul Levy writes: ‘Due to the primal fear which
ultimately driv es it and which it is driv en to cultiv ate, w etiko’ s body
politic has an intrinsic and insistent need for centralising pow er and
control so as to create imagined safety for itself.’ Yeeeeeees!  Exactly!
Why does W etiko w ant humans in an ongoing state of fear? W etiko
itself is  fear and it is petriﬁed of lov e. As evil is an absence of lov e, so
lov e is an absence of fear . Lov e conquers all and especially  W etiko
which is  fear . W etiko brought fear into the w orld when it w asn’ t here
before. Fear  w as the ‘fall’, the fall into low-frequency ignorance and
illusion – fear is F alse E motion A ppearing R eal. The simulation is
driv en and energised by fear because W etiko/Y aldabaoth (fear) are
the simulation. Fear is the absence of lov e and W etiko is the absence
of lov e.
Wetiko today
W e can now view current ev ents from this lev el of perspectiv e. The
‘Covid’ hoax has generated momentous amounts of ongoing fear ,
anxiety , depression and despair which hav e empow ered W etiko. No
w onder people like Gates hav e been the instigators when they are
W etiko incarnate and exhibit ev ery trait of W etiko in the extreme.
See how cold and unemotional these people are like Gates and his
cronies, how dead of ey e they are. That’ s W etiko. Sabbatians are
W etiko and ev erything they control including the W orld Health
Organization, Big Pharma and the ‘v accine’ makers, national ‘health’hierarchies, corporate media, Silicon V alley , the banking system, and
the United Nations with its planned transformation into w orld
gov ernment. All are controlled and possessed by the W etiko
distortion into distorting human society in its image. W e are with
this knowledge at the gatew ay to understanding the w orld.
Divisions of race, culture, creed and sexuality are div ersions to hide
the real division betw een those possessed and inﬂuenced by W etiko
and those that are not. The ‘Covid’ hoax has brought both clearly
into view . Human behaviour is not about race. T yrants and
dictatorships come in all colours and creeds. What unites the US
president bombing the innocent and an African tribe commi ing
genocide against another as in Rw anda? What unites them? Wetiko .
All w ars are W etiko, all genocide is W etiko, all hunger ov er centuries
in a w orld of plenty is W etiko. Children going to bed hungry ,
including in the W est, is W etiko. Cult-generated W oke racial
divisions that focus on the body are designed to obscure the reality
that divisions in behaviour are manifestations of mind, not body .
Obsession with body identity and group judgement is a means to
div ert a ention from the real source of behaviour – mind and
perception. Conﬂict sown by the W oke both within themselv es and
with their target groups are W etiko providing lunch for itself
through still more agents of the division, chaos, and fear on which it
feeds. The Cult is seeking to assimilate the entirety of humanity and
all children and y oung people into the W etiko frequency by
manipulating them into states of fear and despair . W itness all the
suicide and psychological unrav elling since the spring of 2020.
W etiko psychopaths w ant to impose a state of unquestioning
obedience to authority which is no more than a conduit for W etiko to
enforce its will and assimilate humanity into itself. It needs us to
believ e that resistance is futile when it fears resistance and ev en
more so the game-changing non-cooperation with its impositions. It
can use violent resistance for its beneﬁt. V iolent impositions and
violent resistance are both  W etiko. The P ow er of Lov e with its P ow er
of No will sw eep W etiko from our w orld. W etiko and its Cult know
that. They just don’ t w ant us to know .AI Wetiko
This brings me to AI or artiﬁcial intelligence and something else
W etikos don’ t w ant us to know . What is AI really ? I know about
computer code algorithms and AI that learns from data input. These,
how ev er , are more div ersions, the expeditionary force, for the real AI
that they w ant to connect to the human brain as promoted by Silicon
V alley W etikos like Kurzw eil. What is this AI? It is the frequency of
Wetiko , the frequency of the Archons. The connection of AI to the
human brain is the connection of the W etiko frequency to create a
W etiko hiv e mind and complete the job of assimilation. The hiv e
mind is planned to be controlled from Israel and China which are
both 100 percent owned by W etiko Sabbatians. The assimilation
process has been going on minute by minute in the ‘smart’ era which
fused with the ‘Covid’ era. W e are told that social media is
scrambling the minds of the y oung and changing their personality .
This is true, but what is social media? Look more deeply at how it
w orks, how it creates divisions and conﬂict, the hostility and cruelty ,
the targeting of people until they are destroy ed. That’ s W etiko. Social
media is manipulated to tune people to the W etiko frequency with
all the emotional exploitation tricks employ ed by platforms like
Facebook and its W etiko front man, Zuckerberg. Facebook’ s
Instagram announced a new platform for children to ov ercome a
legal bar on them using the main site. This is more W etiko
exploitation and manipulation of kids. Amnesty International
likened the plan to foxes oﬀering to guard the henhouse and said it
w as incompatible with human rights. Since when did W etiko or
Zuckerberg (I repeat myself ) care about that? W ould Brin and P age
at Google, W ojcicki at Y ouT ube, Bezos at Amazon and whoev er the
hell runs T wi er act as they do if they w ere not channelling W etiko?
W ould those who are dev eloping technologies for no other reason
than human control? How about those designing and selling
technologies to kill people and Big Pharma drug and ‘v accine’
producers who know they will end or dev astate liv es? Quite a
thought for these people to consider is that if y ou are W etiko in a
human life y ou are W etiko on the ‘other side’ unless y our frequencychanges and that can only change by a change of perception which
becomes a change of behaviour . Where Gates is going does not bear
thinking about although perhaps that’ s exactly where he w ants to go.
Either w ay , that’ s where he’ s going. His frequency will make it so.
The frequency lair
I hav e been saying for a long time that a big part of the addiction to
smartphones and devices is that a frequency is coming oﬀ them that
entraps the mind. P eople spend ages on their phones and sometimes
ev en a minute or so a er they put them down they pick them up
again and it all repeats. ‘Covid’ lockdowns will hav e increased this
addiction a million times for obvious reasons. Addictions to alcohol
ov erindulgence and drugs are another w ay that W etiko entraps
consciousness to a ach to its own. Both are symptoms of low-
vibrational psychological distress which alcoholism and drug
addiction further compound. Do w e think it’ s really a coincidence
that access to them is made so easy while potions that can take
people into realms bey ond the simulation are banned and illegal? I
hav e explored smartphone addiction in other books, the scale is
mind-blowing, and that lev el of addiction does not come without
help. T ech companies that make these phones are W etiko and they
will hav e no qualms about destroying the minds of children. W e are
seeing again with these companies the W etiko perceptual
combination of psychopathic enforcers and w eak and meek
unquestioning compliance by the rank and ﬁle.
The global Smart Grid is the W etiko Grid and it is crucial to
complete the Cult endgame. The simulation is radiation and w e are
being deluged with technological radiation on a dev astating scale.
W etiko frauds like Elon Musk serv e Cult interests while occasionally
criticising them to maintain his street-cred. 5G and other forms of
W i-Fi are being directed at the earth from space on a v olume and
scale that goes on increasing by the day . Elon Musk’ s (oﬃcially)
SpaceX Starlink project is in the process of pu ing tens of thousands
of satellites in low orbit to cov er ev ery inch of the planet with 5G
and other W i-Fi to create Kurzw eil’ s global ‘cloud’ to which thehuman mind is planned to be a ached v ery soon. SpaceX has
approv al to operate 12,000 satellites with more than 1,300 launched
at the time of writing and applications ﬁled for 30,000  more. Other
operators in the W i-Fi, 5G, low-orbit satellite market include
OneW eb (UK), T elesat (Canada), and AST & Science (US). Musk tells
us that AI could be the end of humanity and then launches a
company called Neuralink to connect the human brain to computers.
Musk’ s (in theory) T esla company is building electric cars and the
driv erless v ehicles of the smart control grid. As frauds and
bullshi ers go Elon Musk in my opinion is Major League.
5G and technological radiation in general are destructiv e to
human health, genetics and psychology and increasing the strength
of artiﬁcial radiation underpins the ﬁv e-sense perceptual bubbles
which are themselv es expressions of radiation or electromagnetism.
Freedom activist John Whitehead w as so right with his ‘databit by
databit, w e are building our own electronic concentration camps’.
The Smart Grid and 5G is a means to control the human mind and
infuse perceptual information into The Field to inﬂuence any one in
sync with its frequency . Y ou can change perception and behaviour
en masse if y ou can manipulate the population into those lev els of
frequency and this is happening all around us today . The arrogance
of Musk and his fellow Cult operativ es knows no bounds in the w ay
that w e see with Gates. Musk’ s satellites are so many in number
already they are changing the night sky when view ed from Earth.
The astronomy community has complained about this and they hav e
seen nothing y et. Some consequences of Musk’ s W etiko hubris
include: Radiation; visible pollution of the night sky; interference
with astronomy and meteorology; ground and w ater pollution from
intensiv e use of increasingly many spaceports; accumulating space
debris; continual deorbiting and burning up of aging satellites,
polluting the atmosphere with toxic dust and smoke; and ev er -
increasing likelihood of collisions. A collectiv e public open le er of
complaint to Musk said:
We are writing to you … because SpaceX is in process of surrounding the Earth with a
network of thousands of satellites whose very purpose is to irradiate every square inch of theEarth. SpaceX, like everyone else, is treating the radiation as if it were not there. As if the
mitochondria in our cells do not depend on electrons moving undisturbed from the food we
digest to the oxygen we breathe.
As if our nervous systems and our hearts are not subject to radio frequency interference like
any piece of electronic equipment. As if the cancer, diabetes, and heart disease that now
afflict a majority of the Earth’s population are not metabolic diseases that result from
interference with our cellular machinery. As if insects everywhere, and the birds and animals
that eat them, are not starving to death as a result.
P eople like Musk and Gates believ e in their limitless W etiko
arrogance that they can do whatev er they like to the w orld because
they own it. Consequences for humanity are irrelev ant. It’ s
absolutely time that w e stopped taking this shit from these self-
styled masters of the Earth when y ou consider where this is going.
Why is the Cult so anti-human?
I hear this question o en: Why w ould they do this when it will aﬀect
them, too? Ah, but will it? Who is this them ? Forget their bodies.
They are just v ehicles for W etiko consciousness. When y ou break it
all down to the foundations w e are looking at a state of sev erely
distorted consciousness targeting another state of consciousness for
assimilation. The rest is detail. The simulation is the ﬂy-trap in
which unique sensations of the ﬁv e senses create a cycle of addiction
called reincarnation. Renegade Minds see that ev erything which
happens in our reality is a smaller v ersion of the whole picture in
line with the holographic principle. Addiction to the radiation of
smart technology is a smaller v ersion of addiction to the whole
simulation. Connecting the body/brain to AI is taking that addiction
on a giant step further to total ongoing control by assimilating
human incarnate consciousness into W etiko. I hav e w atched during
the ‘Covid’ hoax how many are becoming ev er more profoundly
a ached to W etiko’ s perceptual calling cards of aggressiv e response
to any other point of view (‘There is no other god but me’),
psychopathic lack of compassion and empathy , and servile
submission to the narrativ e and will of authority . W etiko is the
psychopaths and  subservience to psychopaths. The Cult of W etiko isso anti-human because it is not  human. It embarked on a mission to
destroy human by targeting ev erything that it means to be human
and to surviv e as human. ‘Covid’ is not the end, just a means to an
end. The Cult with its W etiko consciousness is seeking to change
Earth systems, including the atmosphere, to suit them, not humans.
The gathering bombardment of 5G alone from ground and space is
dramatically changing The Field with which the ﬁv e senses interact.
There is so much more to come if w e sit on our hands and hope it
will all go aw ay . It is not meant to go aw ay . It is meant to get ev er
more extreme and w e need to face that while w e still can – just.
Carbon dioxide is the gas of life. W ithout that human is ov er .
Kaput, gone, history . No natural w orld, no human. The Cult has
created a cock and bull story about carbon dioxide and climate
change to justify its reduction to the point where Gates and the
ignoramus Biden ‘climate chief ’ John Kerry w ant to suck it out of the
atmosphere. Kerry w ants to do this because his master Gates does.
W etikos hav e made the gas of life a demon with the usual support
from the W okers of Extinction Rebellion and similar organisations
and the bewildered puppet-child that is Greta Thunberg who w as
put on the w orld stage by Klaus Schw ab and the W orld Economic
Forum. The name Extinction Rebellion is both ironic and as alw ays
W etiko inv ersion. The gas that w e need to surviv e must be reduced
to sav e us from extinction. The most basic need of human is oxygen
and w e now hav e billions w alking around in face nappies depriving
body and brain of this essential requirement of human existence.
More than that 5G at 60 gigahertz interacts with the oxygen
molecule to reduce the amount of oxygen the body can absorb into
the bloodstream. The obvious knock-on consequences of that for
respiratory and cognitiv e problems and life itself need no further
explanation. Psychopaths like Musk are assembling a global system
of satellites to deluge the human atmosphere with this insanity . The
man should be in jail. Here w e hav e tw o most basic of human needs,
oxygen and carbon dioxide, being dismantled.
T w o others, w ater and food, are ge ing similar treatment with the
United Nations Agendas 21 and 2030 – the Great Reset – planning tocentrally control all w ater and food supplies. P eople will not ev en
own rain w ater that falls on their land. Food is aﬀected at the most
basic lev el by reducing carbon dioxide. W e hav e genetic modiﬁcation
or GMO inﬁltrating the food chain on a mass scale, pesticides and
herbicides polluting the air and destroying the soil. Freshw ater ﬁsh
that provide liv elihoods for 60 million people and feed hundreds of
millions w orldwide are being ‘pushed to the brink’ according the
conserv ationists while climate change is the only focus. Now w e
hav e Gates and Schw ab w anting to dispense with current food
sources all together and replace them with a synthetic v ersion which
the W etiko Cult w ould control in terms of production and who eats
and who doesn’ t. W e hav e been on the T otalitarian Tiptoe to this for
more than 60 y ears as food has become ev er more processed and full
of chemical shite to the point today when it’ s not natural food at all.
As Dr T om Cow an says: ‘If it has a label don’ t eat it.’ Bill Gates is
now the biggest owner of farmland in the United States and he does
nothing without an ulterior motiv e inv olving the Cult. Klaus Schw ab
wrote: ‘T o feed the w orld in the next 50 y ears w e will need to
produce as much food as w as produced in the last 10,000 y ears …
food security will only be achiev ed, how ev er , if regulations on
genetically modiﬁed foods are adapted to reﬂect the reality that gene
editing oﬀers a precise, eﬃcient and safe method of improving
crops.’ Liar . P eople and the w orld are being targeted with
aluminium through v accines, chemtrails, food, drink cans, and
endless other sources when aluminium has been linked to many
health issues including dementia which is increasing y ear a er y ear .
Insects, bees and wildlife essential to the food chain are being
deleted by pesticides, herbicides and radiation which 5G is
dramatically increasing with 6G and 7G to come. The pollinating bee
population is being dev astated while wildlife including birds,
dolphins and whales are having their natural radar blocked by the
eﬀects of ev er -increasing radiation. In the summer windscreens used
to be spla ered with insects so numerous w ere they . It doesn’ t
happen now . Where hav e they gone?Synthetic everything
The Cult is introducing genetically-modiﬁed v ersions of trees, plants
and insects including a Gates-funded project to unleash hundreds of
millions of genetically-modiﬁed, lab-altered and patented male
mosquitoes to mate with wild mosquitoes and induce genetic ﬂaws
that cause them to die out. Clinically-insane Gates-funded Japanese
researchers hav e dev eloped mosquitos that spread v accine and are
dubbed ‘ﬂying v accinators’. Gates is funding the modiﬁcation of
w eather pa erns in part to sell the myth that this is caused by carbon
dioxide and he’ s funding geoengineering of the skies to change the
atmosphere. Some of this came to light with the Gates-backed plan
to release tonnes of chalk into the atmosphere to ‘deﬂect the Sun and
cool the planet’. Funny how they do this while the heating eﬀect of
the Sun is not factored into climate projections focussed on carbon
dioxide. The reason is that they w ant to reduce carbon dioxide (so
don’ t mention the Sun), but at the same time they do w ant to reduce
the impact of the Sun which is so essential to human life and health.
I hav e mentioned the sun-cholesterol-vitamin D connection as they
demonise the Sun with w arnings about skin cancer (caused by the
chemicals in sun cream they tell y ou to splash on). They come from
the other end of the process with statin drugs to reduce cholesterol
that turns sunlight into vitamin D. A lack of vitamin D leads to a
long list of health eﬀects and how vitamin D lev els must hav e fallen
with people conﬁned to their homes ov er ‘Covid’. Gates is funding
other forms of geoengineering and most importantly chemtrails
which are dropping heavy metals, aluminium and self-replicating
nanotechnology onto the Earth which is killing the natural w orld.
See Everything You Need To Know, But Have Never Been Told  for the
detailed background to this.
Ev ery human system is being targeted for deletion by a force that’ s
not human. The W etiko Cult has embarked on the process of
transforming the human body from biological to synthetic biological
as I hav e explained. Biological is being replaced by the artiﬁcial and
synthetic – Archontic ‘countermimicry’ – right across human society .
The plan ev entually is to dispense with the human body altogetherand absorb human consciousness – which it w ouldn’ t really be by
then – into cyberspace (the simulation which is W etiko/Y aldabaoth).
Preparations for that are already happening if people w ould care to
look. The alternativ e media rightly w arns about globalism and ‘the
globalists’, but this is far bigger than that and represents the end of
the human race as w e know it. The ‘bad copy’ of prime reality that
Gnostics describe w as a bad copy of harmony , w onder and beauty to
start with before W etiko/Y aldabaoth set out to change the simulated
‘copy’ into something v ery diﬀerent. The process w as slow to start
with. Entrapped humans in the simulation timeline w ere not
technologically aw are and they had to be brought up to intellectual
speed while being suppressed spiritually to the point where they
could build their own prison while having no idea they w ere doing
so. W e hav e now reached that stage where technological intellect has
the potential to destroy us and that’ s why ev ents are moving so fast.
Central American shaman Don Juan Matus said:
Think for a moment, and tell me how you would explain the contradictions between the
intelligence of man the engineer and the stupidity of his systems of belief, or the stupidity of
his contradictory behaviour. Sorcerers believe that the predators have given us our systems of
beliefs, our ideas of good and evil; our social mores. They are the ones who set up our dreams
of success or failure. They have given us covetousness, greed, and cowardice. It is the
predator who makes us complacent, routinary, and egomaniacal.
In order to keep us obedient and meek and weak, the predators engaged themselves in a
stupendous manoeuvre – stupendous, of course, from the point of view of a fighting strategist;
a horrendous manoeuvre from the point of those who suffer it. They gave us their mind. The
predators’ mind is baroque, contradictory, morose, filled with the fear of being discovered any
minute now.
For ‘predators’ see W etiko, Archons, Y aldabaoth, Jinn, and all the
other v ersions of the same phenomenon in cultures and religions all
ov er the w orld. The theme is alw ays the same because it’ s true and
it’ s real. W e hav e reached the point where w e hav e to deal with it.
The question is – how?
Don’t fight – walk awayI thought I’ d use a controv ersial subheading to get things moving in
terms of our response to global fascism. What do y ou mean ‘don’ t
ﬁght’? What do y ou mean ‘w alk aw ay’? W e’v e got to ﬁght. W e can’ t
w alk aw ay . W ell, it depends what w e mean by ﬁght and w alk aw ay .
If ﬁghting means physical combat w e are playing W etiko’ s game and
falling for its trap. It w ants us to get angry , aggressiv e, and direct
hate and hostility at the enemy w e think w e must ﬁght. Ev ery w ar ,
ev ery ba le, ev ery conﬂict, has been fought with W etiko leading
both sides. It’ s what it does. W etiko w ants a ﬁght, anywhere, any
place. Just hit me, son, so I can hit y ou back. W etiko hits W etiko and
W etiko hits W etiko in return. I am v ery forthright as y ou can see in
exposing W etikos of the Cult, but I don’ t hate them. I refuse to hate
them. It’ s what they w ant. What y ou hate y ou become. What y ou
fight  y ou become. W okers, ‘anti-haters’ and ‘anti-fascists’ prov e this
ev ery time they reach for their keyboards or don their balaclav as. By
w alk aw ay I mean to disengage from W etiko which includes ceasing
to cooperate with its tyranny . P aul Levy says of W etiko:
The way to ‘defeat’ evil is not to try to destroy it (for then, in playing evil’s game, we have
already lost), but rather, to find the invulnerable place within ourselves where evil is unable to
vanquish us – this is to truly ‘win’ our battle with evil.
W etiko is ev erywhere in human society and it’ s been on steroids
since the ‘Covid’ hoax. Ev ery shouting match ov er w earing masks
has W etiko w earing a mask and W etiko not w earing one. It’ s an
electrical circuit of push and resist, push and resist, with W etiko
pushing and  resisting. Each polarity is W etiko empow ering itself.
Dictionary deﬁnitions of ‘resist’ include ‘opposing, refusing to accept
or comply with’ and the w ord to focus on is ‘opposing’. What form
does this take – se ing police cars alight or ‘refusing to accept or
comply with’? The former is W etiko opposing W etiko while the
other points the w ay forw ard. This is the diﬀerence betw een those
aggressiv ely demanding that gov ernment fascism must be obey ed
who stand in stark contrast to the great majority of Pushbackers. W e
saw this clearly with a march by thousands of Pushbackers against
lockdown in London follow ed days later by a W oker -hĳackedprotest in Bristol in which police cars w ere set on ﬁre. Masks w ere
virtually absent in London and widespread in Bristol. W etiko w ants
lockdown on ev ery lev el of society and infuses its aggression to
police it through its unknowing stooges. Lockdown protesters are
the ones with the smiling faces and the hugs, The tw o blatantly
obvious states of being – ge ing more obvious by the day – are the
result of W okers and their like becoming ev er more inﬂuenced by
the simulation Field of W etiko and Pushbackers ev er more
inﬂuenced by The Field of a far higher vibration bey ond the
simulation. W etiko can’ t inv ade the heart which is where most
lockdown opponents are coming from. It’ s the heart that allows them
to see through the lies to the truth in w ays I will be highlighting.
Renegade Minds know that calmness is the place from which
wisdom comes. Y ou w on’ t ﬁnd wisdom in a hissing ﬁt and wisdom
is what w e need in abundance right now . Calmness is not w eakness
– y ou don’ t hav e to scream at the top of y our v oice to be strong.
Calmness is indeed a sign of strength. ‘No’ means I’ m not doing it.
NOOOO!!!  doesn’ t mean y ou’ re not doing it ev en more. V olume
does not adv ance ‘No – I’ m not doing it’. Y ou are just not doing it.
W etiko possessed and inﬂuenced don’ t know how to deal with that.
W etiko w ants a ﬁght and w e should not giv e it one. What it needs
more than anything is our cooperation  and w e should not giv e that
either . Mass rallies and marches are great in that they are a visual
representation of feeling, but if it ends there they are irrelev ant. Y ou
demand that W etikos act diﬀerently? W ell, they’ re not going to are
they? They are W etikos. W e don’ t need to w aste our time demanding
that something doesn’ t happen when that will make no diﬀerence.
W e need to delete the means that allows  it to happen. This, inv ariably ,
is our cooperation. Y ou can demand a child stop ﬁring a peashooter
at the dog or y ou can refuse to buy the peashooter . If y ou provide
the means y ou are cooperating with the dog being smacked on the
nose with a pea. How can the authorities enforce mask-w earing if
millions in a country refuse? What if the 74 million Pushbackers that
v oted for T rump in 2020 refused to w ear masks, close their
businesses or stay in their homes. It w ould be unenforceable. Thefew control the many through the compliance of the many and that’ s
alw ays been the dynamic be it ‘Covid’ regulations or the Roman
Empire. I know people can ﬁnd it intimidating to say no to authority
or stand out in a crowd for being the only one with a face on display;
but it has to be done or it’ s ov er . I hope I’v e made clear in this book
that where this is going will be far more intimidating than standing
up now and saying ‘No’ – I will not cooperate with my own
enslav ement and that of my children. There might be consequences
for some initially , although not so if enough do the same. The
question that must be addressed is what is going to happen if w e
don’ t? It is time to be strong and unyieldingly so. No means no. Not
here and there, but everywhere  and always . I hav e refused to w ear a
mask and obey all the other nonsense. I will not comply with
tyranny . I repeat: Fascism is not imposed by fascists – there are nev er
enough of them. Fascism is imposed by the population acquiescing
to fascism. I will not do it . I will die ﬁrst, or my body will. Living
meekly under fascism is a form of death anyw ay , the death of the
spirit that Martin Luther King described.
Making things happen
W e must not despair . This is not ov er till it’ s ov er and it’ s far from
that. The ‘fat lady’ must refuse to sing. The longer the ‘Covid’ hoax
has dragged on and impacted on more liv es w e hav e seen an
aw akening of phenomenal numbers of people w orldwide to the
realisation that what they hav e believ ed all their liv es is not how the
w orld really is. Research published by the system-serving Univ ersity
of Bristol and King’ s College London in February , 2021, concluded:
‘One in ev ery 11 people in Britain say they trust David Icke’ s take on
the coronavirus pandemic.’ It will be more by now and w e hav e
gathering numbers to build on. W e must urgently progress from
seeing the scam to ceasing to cooperate with it. Prominent German
lawy er Reiner Fuellmich, also licenced to practice law in America, is
doing a magniﬁcent job taking the legal route to bring the
psychopaths to justice through a second Nuremberg tribunal for
crimes against humanity . Fuellmich has an impressiv e record ofbeating the elite in court and he formed the German Corona
Inv estigativ e Commi ee to pursue civil charges against the main
perpetrators with a view to triggering criminal charges. Most
importantly he has grasped the foundation of the hoax – the PCR
test not testing for the ‘virus’ – and Christian Drosten is therefore on
his charge sheet along with Gates frontman T edros at the W orld
Health Organization. Major play ers must be not be allow ed to inﬂict
their horrors on the human race without being brought to book. A
life sentence must follow for Bill Gates and the rest of them. A group
of researchers has also indicted the gov ernment of Norw ay for
crimes against humanity with copies sent to the police and the
International Criminal Court. The lawsuit cites participation in an
internationally-planned false pandemic and violation of
international law and human rights, the European Commission’ s
deﬁnition of human rights by coerciv e rules, Nuremberg and Hague
rules on fundamental human rights, and the Norw egian
constitution. W e must take the initiativ e from hereon and not just
complain, protest and react.
There are practical w ays to support vital mass non-cooperation.
Organising in numbers is one. Lockdown marches in London in the
spring in 2021 w ere mass non-cooperation that the authorities could
not stop. There w ere too many people. Hundreds of thousands
w alked the London streets in the centre of the road for mile a er
mile while the Face-Nappies could only look on. They w ere
determined, but calm, and just did it  with no histrionics and lots of
smiles. The police w ere impotent. Others are organising group
shopping without masks for mutual support and imagine if that w as
happening all ov er . P olicing it w ould be impossible. If the store
refuses to serv e people in these circumstances they w ould be faced
with a long line of trolleys full of goods standing on their own and
ev erything w ould hav e to be returned to the shelv es. How w ould
they cope with that if it kept happening? I am talking here about
moving on from complaining to being pro-activ e; from w atching
things happen to making things happen. I include in this our
relationship with the police. The behaviour of many Face-Nappies•
•
•
•has been disgraceful and any one who thinks they w ould nev er ﬁnd
concentration camp guards in the ‘enlightened’ modern era hav e
had that myth busted big-time. The period and se ing may change –
W etikos nev er do. I w atched ﬁlm footage from a London march in
which a police thug viciously kicked a protestor on the ﬂoor who
had done nothing. His fellow Face-Nappies stood in a ring
protecting him. What he did w as a criminal assault and with a
crowd far outnumbering the police this can no longer be allow ed to
happen unchallenged. I get it when people chant ‘shame on y ou’ in
these circumstances, but that is no longer enough. They have  no
shame those who do this. Crowds needs to start making a citizen’ s
arrest of the police who commit criminal oﬀences and brutally a ack
innocent people and defenceless w omen. A citizen’ s arrest can be
made under section 24A of the UK P olice and Criminal Evidence
(P ACE) Act of 1984 and y ou will ﬁnd something similar in other
countries. I prefer to call it a Common Law arrest rather than
citizen’ s for reasons I will come to shortly . Any one can arrest a
person commi ing an indictable oﬀence or if they hav e reasonable
grounds to suspect they are commi ing an indictable oﬀence. On
both counts the a ack by the police thug w ould hav e fallen into this
category . A citizen’ s arrest can be made to stop someone:
 
Causing physical injury to himself or any other person
Suﬀering physical injury
Causing loss of or damage to property
Making oﬀ before a constable can assume responsibility for him
 
A citizen’ s arrest may also be made to prev ent a breach of the
peace under Common Law and if they believ e a breach of the peace
will happen or anything related to harm likely to be done or already
done in their presence. This is the w ay to go I think – the Common
Law v ersion. If police know that the crowd and members of the
public will no longer be standing and w atching while they committheir thuggery and crimes they will think twice about acting like
Brownshirts and Blackshirts.
Common Law – common sense
Mention of Common Law is v ery important. Most people think the
law is the law as in one law . This is not the case. There are tw o
bodies of law , Common Law and Statute Law , and they are not the
same. Common Law is founded on the simple premise of do no
harm. It does not recognise victimless crimes in which no harm is
done while Statute Law does. There is a Statute Law against almost
ev erything. So what is Statute Law? Amazingly it’ s the law of the sea
that w as brought ashore by the Cult to ov erride the law of the land
which is Common Law . They had no right to do this and as alw ays
they did it anyw ay . They had to. They could not impose their will on
the people through Common Law which only applies to do no harm.
How could y ou stitch up the ﬁne detail of people’ s liv es with that?
Instead they took the law of the sea, or Admiralty Law , and applied
it to the population. Statute Law refers to all the laws spewing out of
gov ernments and their agencies including all the fascist laws and
regulations relating to ‘Covid’. The key point to make is that Statute
Law is contract law . It only applies betw een contracting  corporations.
Most police oﬃcers don’ t ev en know this. They hav e to be kept in
the dark, too. Long ago when merchants and their sailing ships
began to trade with diﬀerent countries a contractual law w as
dev eloped called Admiralty Law and other names. Again it only
applied to contracts  agreed betw een corporate  entities. If there is no
agreed contract the law of the sea had no jurisdiction and that still
applies to its new alias of Statute Law . The problem for the Cult when
the law of the sea w as brought ashore w as an obvious one. P eople
w ere not corporations and neither w ere gov ernment entities. T o
ov ercome the la er they made gov ernments and all associated
organisations corporations. All the institutions are private
corporations  and I mean gov ernments and their agencies, local
councils, police, courts, military , US states, the whole lot. Go to theDun and Bradstreet corporate listings w ebsite for conﬁrmation that
they are all corporations. Y ou are arrested by a priv ate corporation
called the police by someone who is really a priv ate security guard
and they take y ou to court which is another priv ate corporation.
Neither hav e jurisdiction ov er y ou unless y ou consent and contract
with them. This is why y ou hear the mantra about law enforcement
policing by consent  of the people. In truth the people ‘consent’ only
in theory through monumental trickery .
Okay , the Cult ov ercame the corporate law problem by making
gov ernments and institutions corporate entities; but what about
people? They are not corporations are they? Ah ... w ell in a sense,
and only  a sense, they are. Not people exactly – the illusion of
people. The Cult creates a corporation in the name of ev ery one at the
time that their birth certiﬁcate is issued. Note birth/ berth  certiﬁcate
and when y ou go to court under the law of the sea on land y ou stand
in a dock . These are throwbacks to the origin. My Common Law
name is David V aughan Icke. The name of the corporation created
by the gov ernment when I w as born is called Mr David V aughan
Icke usually wri en in capitals as MR DA VID V AUGHAN ICKE.
That is not me, the living, breathing man. It is a ﬁctitious corporate
entity . The trick is to make y ou think that David V aughan Icke and
MR DA VID V AUGHAN ICKE are the same thing. They are not . When
police charge y ou and take y ou to court they are prosecuting the
corporate entity and not the living, breathing, man or w oman. They
hav e to trick y ou into identifying as the corporate entity and
contracting with them. Otherwise they hav e no jurisdiction. They do
this through a language known as legalese. Lawful and legal are not
the same either . Lawful relates to Common Law and legal relates to
Statute Law . Legalese is the language of Statue Law which uses
terms that mean one thing to the public and another in legalese.
Notice that when a police oﬃcer tells someone why they are being
charged he or she will say at the end: ‘Do y ou understand?’ T o the
public that means ‘Do y ou comprehend?’ In legalese it means ‘Do
y ou stand under me?’ Do y ou stand under my authority? If y ou sayy es to the question y ou are unknowingly agreeing to giv e them
jurisdiction ov er y ou in a contract betw een tw o corporate entities.
This is a conﬁdence trick in ev ery w ay . Contracts hav e to be agreed
betw een informed parties and if y ou don’ t know that David
V aughan Icke is agreeing to be the corporation MR DA VID
V AUGHAN ICKE y ou cannot knowingly agree to contract. They are
deceiving y ou and another w ay they do this is to ask for proof of
identity . Y ou usually show them a driving licence or other document
on which y our corporate name is wri en. In doing so y ou are
accepting that y ou are that corporate entity when y ou are not.
Referring to y ourself as a ‘person’ or ‘citizen’ is also identifying with
y our corporate ﬁction which is why I made the Common Law point
about the citizen’ s arrest. If y ou are approached by a police oﬃcer
y ou identify y ourself immediately as a living, breathing, man or
w oman and say ‘I do not consent, I do not contract with y ou and I do
not understand’ or stand under their authority . I hav e a Common
Law birth certiﬁcate as a living man and these are av ailable at no
charge from commonlawcourt.com . Businesses registered under the
Statute Law system means that its laws apply . There are, how ev er ,
w ays to run a business under Common Law . Remember all ‘Covid’
laws and regulations are Statute Law – the law of contracts  and y ou
do not hav e to contract. This doesn’ t mean that y ou can kill someone
and get aw ay with it. Common Law says do no harm and that
applies to physical harm, ﬁnancial harm etc. P olice are employ ees of
priv ate corporations and there needs to be a new system of non-
corporate Common Law constables operating outside the Statute
Law system. If y ou go to davidicke.com  and put Common Law into
the search engine y ou will ﬁnd videos that explain Common Law in
much greater detail. It is deﬁnitely a road w e should w alk.
With all my heart
I hav e heard people say that w e are in a spiritual w ar . I don’ t like the
term ‘w ar ’ with its W etiko dynamic, but I know what they mean.
Sw eep aside all the bodily forms and w e are in a situation in which
tw o states of consciousness are seeking v ery diﬀerent realities.W etiko w ants upheav al, chaos, fear , suﬀering, conﬂict and control.
The other w ants lov e, peace, harmony , fairness and freedom. That’ s
where w e are. W e should not fall for the idea that W etiko is all-
pow erful and there’ s nothing w e can do. W etiko is not all-pow erful.
It’ s a joke, pathetic. It doesn’ t hav e to be, but it has made that choice
for now . A handful of times ov er the y ears when I hav e felt the
presence of its frequency I hav e allow ed it to a ach brieﬂy so I could
consciously observ e its nature. The experience is not pleasant, the
energy is heavy and dark, but the ease with which y ou can kick it
back out the door shows that its real pow er is in persuading us that
it has pow er . It’ s all a con. W etiko is a con. It’ s a trickster and not a
pow er that can control us if w e unleash our own. The con is founded
on manipulating humanity to giv e its pow er to W etiko which
recycles it back to present the illusion that it has pow er when its
pow er is ours  that w e gav e aw ay . This happens on an energetic lev el
and plays out in the w orld of the seen as humanity giving its pow er
to W etiko authority which uses that pow er to control the population
when the pow er is only the pow er the population has handed ov er .
How could it be any other w ay for billions to be controlled by a
relativ e few? I hav e had experiences with people possessed by
W etiko and again y ou can kick its arse if y ou do it with an open
heart. Oh y es – the heart  which can transform the w orld of perceiv ed
‘ma er ’.
W e are receiv er -transmi ers and processors of information, but
what information and where from? Information is processed into
perception in three main areas – the brain, the heart and the belly .
These relate to thinking, knowing, and emotion. W etiko w ants us to
be head and belly people which means w e think within the conﬁnes
of the Matrix simulation and low-vibrational emotional reaction
scrambles balance and perception. A few minutes on social media
and y ou see how emotion is the dominant force. W oke is all emotion
and is therefore thought-free and fact-free. Our heart is something
diﬀerent. It knows  while the head thinks  and has to try to w ork it out
because it doesn’ t know . The human energy ﬁeld has sev en prime
v ortexes which connect us with wider reality ( Fig 23 ). Chakra means‘wheels of light’ in the Sanskrit language of ancient India. The main
ones are: The crown chakra on top of the head; brow (or ‘third ey e’)
chakra in the centre of the forehead; throat chakra; heart chakra in
the centre of the chest; solar plexus chakra below the sternum; sacral
chakra beneath the nav el; and base chakra at the bo om of the spine.
Each one has a particular function or functions. W e feel anxiety and
nerv ousness in the belly where the sacral chakra is located and this
processes emotion that can aﬀect the colon to giv e people ‘the shits’
or make them ‘shit scared’ when they are nerv ous. Chakras all play
an important role, but the Mr and Mrs Big is the heart chakra which
sits at the centre of the sev en, abov e the chakras that connect us to
the ‘physical’ and below those that connect with higher realms (or at
least should). Here in the heart chakra w e feel lov e, empathy and
compassion – ‘My heart goes out to y ou’. Those with closed hearts
become literally ‘heart-less’ in their a itudes and behaviour (see Bill
Gates). Nativ e Americans portray ed W etiko with what P aul Levy
calls a ‘frigid, icy heart, dev oid of mercy’ (see Bill Gates).
Figure 23: The chakra system which interpenetrates the human energy field. The heart chakra
is the governor – or should be.
W etiko trembles at the thought of heart energy which it cannot
inﬁltrate. The frequency is too high. What it seeks to do instead is
close the heart chakra v ortex to block its perceptual and energetic
inﬂuence. Psychopaths hav e ‘hearts of stone’ and emotionally-
damaged people hav e ‘heartache’ and ‘broken hearts’. The
astonishing amount of heart disease is related to heart chakradisruption with its fundamental connection to the ‘physical’ heart.
Dr T om Cow an has wri en an outstanding book challenging the
belief that the heart is a pump and making the connection betw een
the ‘physical’ and spiritual heart. Rudolph Steiner who w as w ay
ahead of his time said the same about the fallacy that the heart is a
pump. What ? The heart is not a pump? That’ s crazy , right?
Ev erybody knows that. Read Cow an’ s Human Heart, Cosmic Heart
and y ou will realise that the v ery idea of the heart as a pump is
ridiculous when y ou see the evidence. How does blood in the feet so
far from the heart get pumped horizontally up the body by the
heart?? Cow an explains in the book the real reason why blood
mov es as it does. Our ‘physical’ heart is used to symbolise lov e when
the source is really the heart v ortex or spiritual heart which is our
most pow erful energetic connection to ‘out there’ expanded
consciousness. That’ s why w e feel knowing  – intuitiv e knowing – in
the centre of the chest. Knowing doesn’ t come from a process of
thoughts leading to a conclusion. It is there in an instant all in one
go. Our heart knows because of its connection to lev els of aw areness
that do  know . This is the meaning and source of intuition – intuitiv e
knowing .
For the last more than 30 y ears of uncov ering the global game and
the nature of reality my heart has been my constant antenna for
truth and accuracy . An American intelligence insider once said that I
had quoted a disinformer in one of my books and y et I had only
quoted the part that w as true. He asked: ‘How do y ou do that?’ By
using my heart antenna w as the answ er and any one can do it. Heart-
centred is how w e are meant to be. W ith a closed heart chakra w e
withdraw into a closed mind and the bubble of ﬁv e-sense reality . If
y ou take a moment to focus y our a ention on the centre of y our
chest, picture a spinning wheel of light and see it opening and
expanding. Y ou will feel it happening, too, and perceptions of the
heart like joy and lov e as the heart impacts on the mind as they
interact. The more the chakra opens the more y ou will feel
expressions of heart consciousness and as the process continues, and
becomes part of y ou, insights and knowings will follow . An openheart is connected to that lev el of aw areness that knows all is One .
Y ou will see from its perspectiv e that the fault-lines that divide us
are only illusions to control us. An open heart does not process the
illusions of race, creed and sexuality except as brief experiences for a
consciousness that is all. Our heart does not see division, only unity
(Figs 24 and 25). There’ s something else, too. Our hearts lov e to
laugh. Mark T w ain’ s quote that says ‘The human race has one really
eﬀectiv e w eapon, and that is laughter ’ is really a reference to the
heart which lov es to laugh with the joy of knowing the true nature of
inﬁnite reality and that all the madness of human society is an
illusion of the mind. T w ain also said: ‘ Against the assault of laughter
nothing can stand.’ This is so true of W etiko and the Cult. Their
insecurity demands that they be taken seriously and their pow er and
authority acknowledged and feared. W e should do nothing of the
sort. W e should not get aggressiv e or fearful which their insecurity
so desires. W e should laugh in their face. Ev en in their no-face as
police come ov er in their face-nappies and expect to be taken
seriously . They don’ t take themselv es seriously looking like that so
why should w e? Laugh in the face of intimidation. Laugh in the face
of tyranny . Y ou will see by its reaction that y ou hav e pressed all of its
bu ons. W etiko does not know what to do in the face of laughter or
when its targets refuse to concede their joy to fear . W e hav e seen
many examples during the ‘Covid’ hoax when people hav e
expressed their energetic pow er and the string puppets of W etiko
retreat with their tail limp betw een their knees. Laugh – the w orld is
bloody mad a er all and if it’ s a choice betw een laughter and tears I
know which w ay I’ m going.
Figure 24: Head consciousness without the heart sees division and everything apart from
everything else.
Figure 25: Heart consciousness sees everything as One.
‘Vaccines’ and the soul
The foundation of W etiko/Archon control of humans is the
separation of incarnate ﬁv e-sense mind from the inﬁnite ‘I’ and
closing the heart chakra where the T rue ‘I’ liv es during a human life.
The goal has been to achiev e complete separation in both cases. I w as
interested therefore to read an account by a French energetic healer
of what she said she experienced with a patient who had been giv en
the ‘Covid’ v accine. Genuine energy healers can sense information
and consciousness ﬁelds at diﬀerent lev els of being which are
referred to as ‘subtle bodies’. She described treating the patient who
later returned a er having, without the healer ’ s knowledge, tw o
doses of the ‘Covid v accine’. The healer said:
I noticed immediately the change, very heavy energy emanating from [the] subtle bodies. The
scariest thing was when I was working on the heart chakra, I connected with her soul: it was
detached from the physical body, it had no contact and it was, as if it was floating in a state of
total confusion: a damage to the consciousness that loses contact with the physical body, i.e.
with our biological machine, there is no longer any communication between them.
I continued the treatment by sending light to the heart chakra, the soul of the person, but it
seemed that the soul could no longer receive any light, frequency or energy. It was a very
powerful experience for me. Then I understood that this substance is indeed used to detach
consciousness so that this consciousness can no longer interact through this body that it
possesses in life, where there is no longer any contact, no frequency, no light, no more
energetic balance or mind.This w ould create a human that is rudderless and at the extreme
almost zombie-like operating with a fractional state of consciousness
at the mercy of W etiko. I w as especially intrigued by what the healer
said in the light of the prediction by the highly-informed Rudolf
Steiner more than a hundred y ears ago. He said:
In the future, we will eliminate the soul with medicine. Under the pretext of a ‘healthy point
of view’, there will be a vaccine by which the human body will be treated as soon as possible
directly at birth, so that the human being cannot develop the thought of the existence of soul
and Spirit. To materialistic doctors will be entrusted the task of removing the soul of humanity.
As today, people are vaccinated against this disease or that disease, so in the future, children
will be vaccinated with a substance that can be produced precisely in such a way that people,
thanks to this vaccination, will be immune to being subjected to the ‘madness’ of spiritual life.
He would be extremely smart, but he would not develop a conscience, and that is the true
goal of some materialistic circles.
Steiner said the v accine w ould detach the physical body from the
etheric body (subtle bodies) and ‘once the etheric body is detached
the relationship betw een the univ erse and the etheric body w ould
become extremely unstable, and man w ould become an automaton’.
He said ‘the physical body of man must be polished on this Earth by
spiritual will – so the v accine becomes a kind of arymanique
(W etiko) force’ and ‘man can no longer get rid of a giv en
materialistic feeling’. Humans w ould then, he said, become
‘materialistic of constitution and can no longer rise to the spiritual’. I
hav e been writing for y ears about DNA being a receiv er -transmi er
of information that connects us to other lev els of reality and these
‘v accines’ changing DNA can be likened to changing an antenna and
what it can transmit and receiv e. Such a disconnection w ould clearly
lead to changes in personality and perception. Steiner further
predicted the arriv al of AI. Big Pharma ‘Covid v accine’ makers,
expressions of W etiko, are testing their DNA-manipulating evil on
children as I write with a view to giving the ‘v accine’ to babies. If it’ s
a soul-body disconnector – and I say that it is or can be – ev ery child
w ould be disconnected from ‘soul’ at birth and the ‘v accine’ w ould
create a closed system in which spiritual guidance from the greater
self w ould play no part. This has been the ambition of W etiko allalong. A P entagon video from 2005 w as leaked of a presentation
explaining the dev elopment of v accines to change behaviour by their
eﬀect on the brain. Those that believ e this is not happening with the
‘Covid’ genetically-modifying procedure masquerading as a
‘v accine’ should make an urgent appointment with Naiv ety
Anonymous. Klaus Schw ab wrote in 2018:
Neurotechnologies enable us to better influence consciousness and thought and to understand
many activities of the brain. They include decoding what we are thinking in fine levels of
detail through new chemicals and interventions that can influence our brains to correct for
errors or enhance functionality.
The plan is clear and only the heart can stop it. W ith ev ery heart that
opens, ev ery mind that aw akens, W etiko is w eakened. Heart and
lov e are far more pow erful than head and hate and so nothing like a
majority is needed to turn this around.
Beyond the Phantom
Our heart is the prime target of W etiko and so it must be the answ er
to W etiko. W e are  our heart which is part of one heart, the inﬁnite
heart. Our heart is where the true self liv es in a human life behind
ﬁrew alls of ﬁv e-sense illusion when an imposter takes its place –
Phantom Self ; but our heart w aits patiently to be set free any time w e
choose to see bey ond the Phantom, bey ond W etiko. A W etikoed
Phantom Self can wreak mass death and destruction while the lov e
of forev er is locked aw ay in its heart. The time is here to unleash its
pow er and let it sw eep aw ay the fear and despair that is W etiko.
Heart consciousness does not seek manipulated, censored,
adv antage for its belief or religion, its activism and desires. As an
expression of the One it treats all as One with the same rights to
freedom and opinion. Our heart demands fairness for itself no more
than for others. From this unity of heart w e can come together in
mutual support and transform this W etikoed w orld into what reality
is meant to be – a place of lov e, joy , happiness, fairness, justice and
freedom. W etiko has another agenda and that’ s why the w orld is asit is, but enough of this nonsense. W etiko can’ t stay where hearts are
open and it w orks so hard to keep them closed. Fear is its currency
and its food source and lov e in its true sense has no fear . Why w ould
lov e hav e fear when it knows it is All That Is, Has Been, And Ever Can
Be  on an eternal exploration of all possibility? Lov e in this true sense
is not the physical a raction that passes for lov e. This can be an
expression of it, y es, but Inﬁnite Lov e, a lov e without condition, goes
far deeper to the core of all being. It is  the core of all being. Inﬁnite
realty w as born from lov e bey ond the illusions of the simulation.
Lov e inﬁnitely expressed is the knowing that all is One and the
swi ly-passing experience of separation is a temporary
hallucination. Y ou cannot disconnect from Oneness; y ou can only
perceive  that y ou hav e and withdraw from its inﬂuence. This is the
most important of all perception trickery by the mind parasite that is
W etiko and the foundation of all its potential for manipulation.
If w e open our hearts, open the sluice gates of the mind, and
redeﬁne self-identity amazing things start to happen. Consciousness
expands or contracts in accordance with self-identity . When true self
is recognised as inﬁnite aw areness and label self – Phantom Self – is
seen as only a series of brief experiences life is transformed.
Consciousness expands to the extent that self-identity expands and
ev erything changes. Y ou see unity , not division, the picture, not the
pixels. From this w e can play the long game. No more is an
experience something in and of itself, but a ﬂeeting moment in the
eternity of forev er . Suddenly people in uniform and dark suits are no
longer intimidating. Doing what y our heart knows to be right is no
longer intimidating and consequences for those actions take on the
same nature of a brief experience that passes in the blink of an
inﬁnite ey e. Intimidation is all in the mind. Bey ond the mind there is
no intimidation.
An open heart does not consider consequences for what it knows
to be right. T o do so w ould be to consider not doing what it knows to
be right and for a heart in its pow er that is nev er an option. The
Renegade Mind is really the Renegade Heart. Consideration of
consequences will alw ays provide a getaw ay car for the mind andthe heart doesn’ t w ant one. What is right in the light of what w e face
today is to stop cooperating with W etiko in all its forms and to do it
without fear or compromise. Y ou cannot compromise with tyranny
when tyranny alw ays demands more until it has ev erything. Life is
y our perception and y ou are y our destiny . Change y our perception
and y ou change y our life. Change collectiv e perception and w e
change the w orld.
Come on people  … One human family , One heart, One goal …
FREEEEEEDOM !
W e must se le for nothing less.TPostscript
he big scare story as the book goes to press is the ‘Indian’
v ariant and the w orld is being deluged with propaganda about
the ‘Covid catastrophe’ in India which mirrors in its lies and
misrepresentations what happened in Italy before the ﬁrst lockdown
in 2020.
The New York Post  published a picture of someone who had
‘collapsed in the street from Covid’ in India in April, 2021, which
w as actually taken during a gas leak in May , 2020. Same old, same
old. Media articles in mid-February w ere asking why India had been
so untouched by ‘Covid’ and then as their v accine rollout gathered
pace the alleged ‘cases’ began to rapidly increase. Indian ‘Covid
v accine’ maker Bharat Biotech w as funded into existence by the Bill
and Melinda Gates Foundation (the pair announced their div orce in
May , 2021, which is a pity because they so deserv e each other). The
Indian ‘Covid crisis’ w as ramped up by the media to terrify the
w orld and prepare people for submission to still more restrictions.
The scam that w orked the ﬁrst time w as being repeated only with far
more people seeing through the deceit. Davidicke.com  and
Ickonic.com  hav e sought to tell the true story of what is happening
by talking to people living through the Indian nightmare which has
nothing to do with ‘Covid’. W e posted a le er from ‘ Alisha’ in Pune
who told a v ery diﬀerent story to gov ernment and media mendacity .
She said scenes of dying people and ov erwhelmed hospitals w ere
designed to hide what w as really happening – genocide and
starv ation. Alisha said that millions had already died of starv ation
during the ongoing lockdowns while gov ernment and media w ere
lying and making it look like the ‘virus’:Restaurants, shops, gyms, theatres, basically everything is shut. The cities are ghost towns.
Even so-called ‘essential’ businesses are only open till 11am in the morning. You basically
have just an hour to buy food and then your time is up.
Inter-state travel and even inter-district travel is banned. The cops wait at all major crossroads
to question why you are traveling outdoors or to fine you if you are not wearing a mask.
The medical community here is also complicit in genocide, lying about hospitals being full
and turning away people with genuine illnesses, who need immediate care. They have even
created a shortage of oxygen cylinders.
This is the classic Cult modus operandi play ed out in ev ery country .
Alisha said that people who w ould not hav e a PCR test not testing
for the ‘virus’ w ere being denied hospital treatment. She said the
people hit hardest w ere migrant w orkers and those in rural areas.
Most businesses employ ed migrant w orkers and with ev erything
closed there w ere no jobs, no income and no food. As a result
millions w ere dying of starv ation or malnutrition. All this w as
happening under Prime Minister Narendra Modi, a 100-percent
asset of the Cult, and it emphasises y et again the scale of pure anti-
human evil w e are dealing with. Australia banned its people from
returning home from India with penalties for trying to do so of up to
ﬁv e y ears in jail and a ﬁne of £37,000. The manufactured ‘Covid’
crisis in India w as being prepared to justify further fascism in the
W est. Obvious connections could be seen betw een the Indian
‘v accine’ programme and increased ‘cases’ and this became a
common theme. The Seychelles, the most per capita ‘Covid
v accinated’ population in the w orld, w ent back into lockdown a er a
‘surge of cases’.
Long ago the truly evil Monsanto agricultural biotechnology
corporation with its big connections to Bill Gates dev astated Indian
farming with genetically-modiﬁed crops. Human rights activist
Gurcharan Singh highlighted the eﬀorts by the Indian gov ernment
to complete the job by destroying the food supply to hundreds of
millions with ‘Covid’ lockdowns. He said that 415 million people at
the bo om of the disgusting caste system (still going whatev er they
say) w ere below the pov erty line and struggled to feed themselv es
ev ery y ear . Now the gov ernment w as imposing lockdown at just thetime to destroy the harv est. This deliberate policy w as leading to
mass starv ation. P eople may reel back at the suggestion that a
gov ernment w ould do that, but W etiko-controlled ‘leaders’ are
capable of any lev el of evil. In fact what is described in India is in the
process of being instigated w orldwide. The food chain and food
supply are being targeted at ev ery lev el to cause w orld hunger and
thus control. Bill Gates is not the biggest owner of farmland in
America for no reason and destroying access to food aids both the
depopulation agenda and the plan for synthetic ‘food’ already being
funded into existence by Gates. Add to this the coming hyper -
inﬂation from the suicidal creation of fake ‘money’ in response to
‘Covid’ and the breakdown of container shipping systems and y ou
hav e a cocktail that can only lead one w ay and is meant to. The Cult
plan is to crash the entire system to ‘build back be er ’ with the Great
Reset.
‘Vaccine’ transmission
Reports from all ov er the w orld continue to emerge of w omen
suﬀering menstrual and fertility problems a er having the fake
‘v accine’ and of the non-’v accinated’ having similar problems when
interacting with the ‘v accinated’. There are far too many for
‘coincidence’ to be credible. W e’v e had menopausal w omen ge ing
periods, others having periods stop or not stopping for w eeks,
passing clots, sometimes the lining of the uterus, breast
irregularities, and miscarriages (which increased by 400 percent in
parts of the United States). Non-‘v accinated’ men and children hav e
suﬀered blood clots and nose bleeding a er interaction with the
‘v accinated’. Babies hav e died from the eﬀects of breast milk from a
‘v accinated’ mother . A w ake doctors – the small minority –
speculated on the cause of non-’v accinated’ suﬀering the same
eﬀects as the ‘v accinated’. W as it nanotechnology in the synthetic
substance transmi ing frequencies or w as it a straight chemical
biow eapon that w as being transmi ed betw een people? I am not
saying that some kind of chemical transmission is not one possible
answ er , but the foundation of all that the Cult does is frequency andthis is fertile ground for understanding how transmission can
happen. American doctor Carrie Madej, an internal medicine
physician and osteopath, has been practicing for the last 20 y ears,
teaching medical students, and she says a ending diﬀerent meetings
where the agenda for humanity w as discussed. Madej, who operates
out of Georgia, did not dismiss other possible forms of transmission,
but she focused on frequency in search of an explanation for
transmission. She said the Moderna and Pﬁzer ‘v accines’ contained
nano-lipid particles as a key component. This w as a brand new
technology nev er before used on humanity . ‘They’ re using a
nanotechnology which is pre y much li le tiny computer bits …
nanobots or hydrogel.’ Inside the ‘v accines’ w as ‘this sci-ﬁ kind of
substance’ which suppressed immune checkpoints to get into the
cell. I referred to this earlier as the ‘T rojan horse’ technique that
tricks the cell into opening a gatew ay for the self-replicating
synthetic material and while the immune system is artiﬁcially
suppressed the body has no defences. Madej said the substance
serv ed many purposes including an on-demand ability to ‘deliv er
the payload’ and using the nano ‘computer bits’ as biosensors in the
body . ‘It actually has the ability to accumulate data from y our body ,
like y our breathing, y our respiration, thoughts, emotions, all kinds
of things.’
She said the technology obviously has the ability to operate
through W i-Fi and transmit and receiv e energy , messages,
frequencies or impulses. ‘Just imagine y ou’ re ge ing this new
substance in y ou and it can react to things all around y ou, the 5G,
y our smart device, y our phones.’ W e had something completely
foreign in the human body that had nev er been launched large scale
at a time when w e w ere seeing 5G going into schools and hospitals
(plus the Musk satellites) and she believ ed the ‘v accine’ transmission
had something to do with this: ‘… if these people hav e this inside of
them … it can act like an antenna and actually transmit it outw ardly
as w ell.’ The synthetic substance produced its own v oltage and so it
could hav e that kind of eﬀect. This ﬁts with my own contention that
the nano receiv er -transmi ers are designed to connect people to theSmart Grid and break the receiv er -transmi er connection to
expanded consciousness. That w ould explain the French energy
healer ’ s experience of the disconnection of body from ‘soul’ with
those who hav e had the ‘v accine’. The nanobots, self-replicating
inside the body , w ould also transmit the synthetic frequency which
could be picked up through close interaction by those who hav e not
been ‘v accinated’. Madej speculated that perhaps it w as 5G and
increased lev els of other radiation that w as causing the symptoms
directly although interestingly she said that non-‘v accinated’
patients had shown improv ement when they w ere aw ay from the
‘v accinated’ person they had interacted with. It must be remembered
that y ou can control frequency and energy with y our mind and y ou
can consciously create energetic barriers or bubbles with the mind to
stop damaging frequencies from penetrating y our ﬁeld. American
paediatrician Dr Larry P alevsky said the ‘v accine’ w as not a ‘v accine’
and w as nev er designed to protect from a ‘viral’ infection. He called
it ‘a massiv e, brilliant propaganda of genocide’ because they didn’ t
hav e to inject ev ery one to get the result they w anted. He said the
content of the jabs w as able to infuse any material into the brain,
heart, lungs, kidneys, liv er , sperm and female productiv e system.
‘This is genocide; this is a w eapon of mass destruction.’ At the same
time American colleges w ere banning students from a ending if
they didn’ t hav e this life-changing and potentially life-ending
‘v accine’. Class action lawsuits must follow when the consequences
of this college fascism come to light. As the book w as going to press
came reports about fertility eﬀects on sperm in ‘v accinated’ men
which w ould absolutely ﬁt with what I hav e been saying and
hospitals continued to ﬁll with ‘v accine’ reactions. Another question
is what about transmission via blood transfusions? The NHS has
extended blood donation restrictions from sev en days a er a ‘Covid
v accination’ to 28 days a er ev en a sore arm reaction.
I said in the spring of 2020 that the then touted ‘Covid v accine’
w ould be ongoing each y ear like the ﬂu jab. A y ear later Pﬁzer CEO,
the appalling Albert Bourla, said people w ould ‘likely’ need a
‘booster dose’ of the ‘v accine’ within 12 months of ge ing ‘fullyv accinated’ and then a y early shot. ‘V ariants will play a key role’, he
said conﬁrming the point. Johnson & Johnson CEO Alex Gorsky also
took time out from his ‘v accine’ disaster to say that people may need
to be v accinated against ‘Covid-19’ each y ear . UK Health Secretary ,
the psychopath Ma  Hancock, said additional ‘boosters’ w ould be
av ailable in the autumn of 2021. This is the trap of the ‘v accine
passport’. The public will hav e to accept ev ery last ‘v accine’ they
introduce, including for the fake ‘v ariants’, or it w ould cease to be
v alid. The only other w ay in some cases w ould be continuous testing
with a test not testing for the ‘virus’ and what is on the sw abs
constantly pushed up y our noise tow ards the brain ev ery time?
‘Vaccines’ changing behaviour
I mentioned in the body of the book how I believ ed w e w ould see
gathering behaviour changes in the ‘v accinated’ and I am already
hearing such comments from the non-‘v accinated’ describing
behaviour changes in friends, lov ed ones and w ork colleagues. This
will only increase as the self-replicating synthetic material and
nanoparticles expand in body and brain. An article in the Guardian  in
2016 detailed research at the Univ ersity of V irginia in Charlo esville
which dev eloped a new method for controlling brain circuits
associated with complex animal behaviour . The method, dubbed
‘magnetogenetics’, inv olv es genetically-engineering a protein called
ferritin, which stores and releases iron, to create a magnetised
substance – ‘Magneto’ – that can activ ate speciﬁc groups of nerv e
cells from a distance. This is claimed to be an adv ance on other
methods of brain activity manipulation known as optogenetics and
chemogenetics (the Cult has been dev eloping methods of brain
control for a long time). The ferritin technique is said to be non-
inv asiv e and able to activ ate neurons ‘rapidly and rev ersibly’. In
other w ords, human thought and perception. The article said that
earlier studies rev ealed how nerv e cell proteins ‘activ ated by heat
and mechanical pressure can be genetically engineered so that they
become sensitiv e to radio w av es and magnetic ﬁelds, by a aching
them to an iron-storing protein called ferritin, or to inorganicparamagnetic particles’. Sensitiv e to radio w av es and magnetic
ﬁelds? Y ou mean like 5G, 6G and 7G? This is the human-AI Smart
Grid hiv e mind w e are talking about. The Guardian  article said:
… the researchers injected Magneto into the striatum of freely behaving mice, a deep brain
structure containing dopamine-producing neurons that are involved in reward and motivation,
and then placed the animals into an apparatus split into magnetised and non-magnetised
sections.
Mice expressing Magneto spent far more time in the magnetised areas than mice that did not,
because activation of the protein caused the striatal neurons expressing it to release
dopamine, so that the mice found being in those areas rewarding. This shows that Magneto
can remotely control the firing of neurons deep within the brain, and also control complex
behaviours.
Make no mistake this basic methodology will be part of the ‘Covid
v accine’ cocktail and using magnetics to change brain function
through electromagnetic ﬁeld frequency activ ation. The P entagon is
dev eloping a ‘Covid v accine’ using ferritin. Magnetics w ould explain
changes in behaviour and why videos are appearing across the
Internet as I write showing how magnets stick to the skin at the
point of the ‘v accine’ shot. Once people take these ‘v accines’
anything becomes possible in terms of brain function and illness
which will be blamed on ‘Covid-19’ and ‘v ariants’. Magnetic ﬁeld
manipulation w ould further explain why the non-‘v accinated’ are
reporting the same symptoms as the ‘v accinated’ they interact with
and why those symptoms are reported to decrease when not in their
company . Interestingly ‘Magneto’, a ‘mutant’, is a character in the
Marv el Comic X-Men  stories with the ability to manipulate magnetic
ﬁelds and he believ es that mutants should ﬁght back against their
human oppressors by any means necessary . The character w as born
Erik Lehnsherr to a Jewish family in Germany .
Cult-controlled courts
The European Court of Human Rights opened the door for
mandatory ‘Covid-19 v accines’ across the continent when it ruled in
a Czech Republic dispute ov er childhood immunisation that legallyenforced v accination could be ‘necessary in a democratic society’.
The 17 judges decided that compulsory v accinations did not breach
human rights law . On the face of it the judgement w as so inv erted
y ou gasp for air . If not having a v accine infused into y our body is not
a human right then what is? Ah, but they said human rights law
which has been speciﬁcally wri en to delete all human rights at the
behest of the state (the Cult). Article 8 of the European Conv ention
on Human Rights relates to the right to a priv ate life. The crucial
w ord here is ‘except’ :
There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right EXCEPT
such as is in accordance with the law and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests
of national security, public safety or the economic wellbeing of the country, for the prevention
of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
and freedoms of others [My emphasis].
No interference except  in accordance with the law means there are  no
‘human rights’ except  what EU gov ernments decide y ou can hav e at
their behest. ‘ As is necessary in a democratic society’ explains that
reference in the judgement and ‘in the interests of national security ,
public safety or the economic w ell-being of the country , for the
prev ention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or
morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others’
giv es the EU a coach and horses to ride through ‘human rights’ and
sca er them in all directions. The judiciary is not a check and
balance on gov ernment extremism; it is a v ehicle to enforce it. This
judgement w as almost laughably predictable when the last thing the
Cult w anted w as a decision that w ent against mandatory
v accination. Judges rule ov er and ov er again to beneﬁt the system of
which they are a part. V accination disputes that come before them
are inv ariably deliv ered in fav our of doctors and authorities
representing the view of the state which owns the judiciary . Oh, y es,
and w e hav e ev en had calls to stop pu ing ‘Covid-19’ on death
certiﬁcates within 28 days of a ‘positiv e test’ because it is claimed the
practice makes the ‘v accine’ appear not to w ork. They are laughing
at y ou.The scale of madness, inhumanity and things to come w as
highlighted when those not ‘v accinated’ for ‘Covid’ w ere refused
ev acuation from the Caribbean island of St V incent during massiv e
v olcanic eruptions. Cruise ships taking residents to the safety of
another island allow ed only the ‘v accinated’ to board and the rest
w ere le  to their fate. Ev en in life and death situations like this w e
see ‘Covid’ stripping people of their most basic human instincts and
the insanity is ev en more extreme when y ou think that fake
‘v accine’-makers are not ev en claiming their body-manipulating
concoctions stop ‘infection’ and ‘transmission’ of a ‘virus’ that
doesn’ t exist. St V incent Prime Minister Ralph Gonsalv es said: ‘The
chief medical oﬃcer will be identifying the persons already
v accinated so that w e can get them on the ship.’ Note again the
pow er of the chief medical oﬃcer who, like Whi y in the UK, will be
answ ering to the W orld Health Organization. This is the Cult
netw ork structure that has ov erridden politicians who ‘follow the
science’ which means doing what WHO-controlled ‘medical oﬃcers’
and ‘science advisers’ tell them. Gonsalv es ev en said that residents
who w ere ‘v accinated’ a er the order so they could board the ships
w ould still be refused entry due to possible side eﬀects such as
‘w ooziness in the head’. The good news is that if they w ere w oozy
enough in the head they could qualify to be prime minister of St
V incent.
Microchipping freedom
The European judgement will be used at some point to justify mov es
to enforce the ‘Covid’ DNA-manipulating procedure. Sandra Ro,
CEO of the Global Blockchain Business Council, told a W orld
Economic Forum ev ent that she hoped ‘v accine passports’ w ould
help to ‘driv e forced consent and standardisation’ of global digital
identity schemes: ‘I’ m hoping with the desire and global demand for
some sort of v accine passport – so that people can get trav elling and
w orking again – [it] will driv e forced consent, standardisation, and
frankly , cooperation across the w orld.’ The lady is either not v ery
bright, or thoroughly mendacious, to use the term ‘forced consent’.Y ou do not ‘consent’ if y ou are forced – y ou submit . She w as
describing what the plan has been all along and that’ s to enforce a
digital identity on ev ery human without which they could not
function. ‘V accine passports’ are opening the door and are far from
the end goal. A digital identity w ould allow y ou to be tracked in
ev erything y ou do in cyberspace and this is the same technique used
by Cult-owned China to enforce its social credit system of total
control. The ultimate ‘passport’ is planned to be a microchip as my
books hav e w arned for nearly 30 y ears. Those nice people at the
P entagon w orking for the Cult-controlled Defense Adv anced
Research Projects Agency (DARP A) claimed in April, 2021, they
hav e dev eloped a microchip inserted under the skin to detect
‘asymptomatic Covid-19 infection’ before it becomes an outbreak
and a ‘rev olutionary ﬁlter ’ that can remov e the ‘virus’ from the
blood when a ached to a dialysis machine. The only problems with
this are that the ‘virus’ does not exist and people transmi ing the
‘virus’ with no symptoms is brain-numbing bullshit. This is, of
course, not a ruse to get people to be microchipped for v ery diﬀerent
reasons. DARP A also said it w as producing a one-stop ‘v accine’ for
the ‘virus’ and all ‘v ariants’. One of the most sinister organisations
on Planet Earth is doing this? Be er hav e it then. These people are
insane because W etiko that possesses them is insane.
Researchers from the Salk Institute in California announced they
hav e created an embry o that is part human and part monkey . My
books going back to the 1990s hav e exposed experiments in top
secret underground facilities in the United States where humans are
being crossed with animal and non-human ‘extraterrestrial’ species.
They are now easing that long-dev eloped capability into the public
arena and there is much more to come giv en w e are dealing with
psychiatric basket cases. T alking of which – Elon Musk’ s scientists at
Neuralink trained a monkey to play P ong and other puzzles on a
computer screen using a joystick and when the monkey made the
correct mov e a metal tube squirted banana smoothie into his mouth
which is the basic technique for training humans into unquestioning
compliance. T w o Neuralink chips w ere in the monkey’ s skull andmore than 2,000 wires ‘fanned out’ into its brain. Ev entually the
monkey play ed a video game purely with its brain w av es.
Psychopathic narcissist Musk said the ‘breakthrough’ w as a step
tow ards pu ing Neuralink chips into human skulls and merging
minds with artiﬁcial intelligence. Exactly . This man is so dark and
Cult to his DNA.
World Economic Fascism (WEF)
The W orld Economic Forum is telling y ou the plan by the statements
made at its many and v arious ev ents. Cult-owned fascist Y ouT ube
CEO Susan W ojcicki spoke at the 2021 WEF Global T echnology
Gov ernance Summit (see the name) in which 40 gov ernments and
150 companies met to ensure ‘the responsible design and
deployment of emerging technologies’. Orw ellian translation:
‘Ensuring the design and deployment of long-planned technologies
will adv ance the Cult agenda for control and censorship.’ Freedom-
destroy er and Nuremberg-bound W ojcicki expressed support for
tech platforms like hers to censor content that is ‘technically legal but
could be harmful’. Who decides what is ‘harmful’? She does and
they do. ‘Harmful’ will be whatev er the Cult doesn’ t w ant people to
see and w e hav e legislation proposed by the UK gov ernment that
w ould censor content on the basis of ‘harm’ no ma er if the
information is fair , legal and prov ably true. Make that especially  if it
is fair , legal and prov ably true. W ojcicki called for a global coalition
to be formed to enforce content moderation standards through
automated censorship. This is a w oman and mega-censor so self-
deluded that she shamelessly accepted a ‘free expression’ aw ard –
Wojcicki  – in an ev ent sponsored by her own YouTube . They hav e no
shame and no self-aw areness.
Y ou know that ‘Covid’ is a scam and W ojcicki a Cult operativ e
when Y ouT ube is censoring medical and scientiﬁc opinion purely on
the grounds of whether it supports or opposes the Cult ‘Covid’
narrativ e. Florida gov ernor Ron DeSantis compiled an expert panel
with four professors of medicine from Harv ard, Oxford, and
Stanford Univ ersities who spoke against forcing children andv accinated people to w ear masks. They also said there w as no proof
that lockdowns reduced spread or death rates of ‘Covid-19’. Cult-
gofer W ojcicki and her Y ouT ube deleted the panel video ‘because it
included content that contradicts the consensus of local and global
health authorities regarding the eﬃcacy of masks to prev ent the
spread of Covid-19’. This ‘consensus’ refers to what the Cult tells the
W orld Health Organization to say and the WHO tells ‘local health
authorities’ to do. W ojcicki knows this, of course. The panellists
pointed out that censorship of scientiﬁc debate w as responsible for
deaths from many causes, but W ojcicki couldn’ t care less. She w ould
not dare go against what she is told and as a disgrace to humanity
she w ouldn’ t w ant to anyw ay . The UK gov ernment is seeking to pass
a fascist ‘Online Safety Bill’ to speciﬁcally target with massiv e ﬁnes
and other means non-censored video and social media platforms to
make them censor ‘lawful but harmful’ content like the Cult-owned
Facebook, T wi er , Google and Y ouT ube. What is ‘lawful but
harmful’ w ould be decided by the fascist Blair -created Ofcom.
Another WEF obsession is a cyber -a ack on the ﬁnancial system
and this is clearly what the Cult has planned to take down the bank
accounts of ev ery one – except theirs. Those that think they hav e
enough money for the Cult agenda not to ma er to them hav e got a
big lesson coming if they continue to ignore what is staring them in
the face. The W orld Economic Forum, funded by Gates and fronted
by Klaus Schw ab, announced it w ould be running a ‘simulation’
with the Russian gov ernment and global banks of just such an a ack
called Cyber P olygon 2021. What they simulate – as with the ‘Covid’
Ev ent 201 – they plan to instigate. The WEF is inv olv ed in a project
with the Cult-owned Carnegie Endowment for International P eace
called the WEF-Carnegie Cyber P olicy Initiativ e which seeks to
merge W all Street banks, ‘regulators’ (I lov e it) and intelligence
agencies to ‘prev ent’ (arrange and allow) a cyber -a ack that w ould
bring down the global ﬁnancial system as long planned by those that
control the WEF and the Carnegie operation. The Carnegie
Endowment for International P eace sent an instruction to First W orldW ar US President W oodrow W ilson not to let the w ar end before
society had been irrev ersibly transformed.
The Wuhan lab diversion
As I close, the Cult-controlled authorities and lapdog media are
systematically pushing ‘the virus w as released from the W uhan lab’
narrativ e. There are tw o v ersions – it happened by accident and it
happened on purpose. Both are nonsense. The perceiv ed existence of
the nev er -shown-to-exist ‘virus’ is vital to sell the impression that
there is actually an infectiv e agent to deal with and to allow the
endless potential for terrifying the population with ‘v ariants’ of a
‘virus’ that does not exist. The authorities at the time of writing are
going with the ‘by accident’ while the alternativ e media is
promoting the ‘on purpose’. Cable news host T ucker Carlson who
has questioned aspects of lockdown and ‘v accine’ compulsion has
bought the W uhan lab story . ‘Ev ery one now agrees’ he said. W ell, I
don’ t and many others don’ t and the question is why  does the system
and its media suddenly ‘agree’? When the media mov es as one unit
with a narrativ e it is alw ays a lie – witness the hour by hour
mendacity of the ‘Covid’ era. Why w ould this Cult-owned
combination which has unleashed lies like machine gun ﬁre
suddenly ‘agree’ to tell the truth??
Much of the alternativ e media is buying the lie because it ﬁts the
conspiracy narrativ e, but it’ s the wrong  conspiracy . The real
conspiracy is that there is no virus  and that is what the Cult is
desperate to hide. The idea that the ‘virus’ w as released by accident
is ludicrous when the whole ‘Covid’ hoax w as clearly long-planned
and w aiting to be play ed out as it w as so fast in accordance with the
Rockefeller document and Ev ent 201. So they prepared ev erything in
detail ov er decades and then sat around strumming their ﬁngers
w aiting for an ‘accidental’ release from a bio-lab? What??  It’ s crazy .
Then there’ s the ‘on purpose’ claim. Y ou w ant to circulate a ‘deadly
virus’ and hide the fact that y ou’v e done so and y ou release it down
the street from the highest-lev el bio-lab in China? I repeat – What??Y ou w ould release it far from that lab to stop any association being
made. But, no, w e’ll do it in a place where the connection w as certain
to be made. Why w ould y ou need to scam ‘cases’ and ‘deaths’ and
pay hospitals to diagnose ‘Covid-19’ if y ou had a real ‘virus’? What
are sections of the alternativ e media doing believing this crap?
Where w ere all the mass deaths in W uhan from a ‘deadly pathogen’
when the recov ery to normal life a er the initial propaganda w as
dramatic in speed? Why isn’ t the ‘deadly pathogen’ now circulating
all ov er China with bodies in the street? Once again w e hav e the
technique of tell them what they w ant to hear and they will likely
believ e it. The alternativ e media has its ‘conspiracy’ and with
Carlson it ﬁts with his ‘China is the danger ’ narrativ e ov er y ears.
China is  a danger as a global Cult operations centre, but not for this
reason. The W uhan lab story also has the potential to instigate
conﬂict with China when at some stage the plan is to trigger a
Problem-Reaction-Solution confrontation with the W est. Question
ev erything – everything  – and especially when the media agrees on a
common party line.
Third wave … fourth wave … fifth wave …
As the book w ent into production the w orld w as being set up for
more lockdowns and a ‘third w av e’ supported by inv ented ‘v ariants’
that w ere increasing all the time and will continue to do so in public
statements and computer programs, but not in reality . India became
the new Italy in the ‘Covid’ propaganda campaign and w e w ere told
to be frightened of the new ‘Indian strain’. Somehow I couldn’ t ﬁnd
it within myself to do so. A document produced for the UK
gov ernment entitled ‘Summary of further modelling of easing of
restrictions – Roadmap Step 2’ declared that a third w av e w as
inevitable (of course when it’ s in the script) and it w ould be the fault
of children and those who refuse the health-destroying fake ‘Covid
v accine’. One of the computer models inv olv ed came from the Cult-
owned Imperial College  and the other from W arwick Univ ersity
which I w ouldn’ t trust to tell me the date in a calendar factory . The
document states that both models presumed extremely high uptakeof the ‘Covid v accines’ and didn’ t allow for ‘v ariants’. The document
states: ‘The resurgence is a result of some people (mostly children)
being ineligible for v accination; others choosing not to receiv e the
v accine; and others being v accinated but not perfectly protected.’
The mendacity takes the breath aw ay . Okay , blame those with a
brain who w on’ t take the DNA-modifying shots and put more
pressure on children to hav e it as ‘trials’ w ere underw ay inv olving
children as y oung as six months with parents who giv e insanity a
bad name. Massiv e pressure is being put on the y oung to hav e the
fake ‘v accine’ and child age consent limits hav e been systematically
low ered around the w orld to stop parents interv ening. Most
extraordinary about the document w as its claim that the ‘third w av e’
w ould be driv en by ‘the resurgence in both hospitalisations and
deaths … dominated by those that have received two doses of the vaccine ,
comprising around 60-70% of the w av e respectiv ely’. The predicted
peak of the ‘third w av e’ suggested 300 deaths per day with 250 of
them fully ‘vaccinated’ people . How many more lies do acquiescers
need to be told before they see the obvious? Those who took the jab
to ‘protect themselv es’ are projected to be those who mostly get sick
and die? So what’ s in the ‘v accine’? The document w ent on:
It is possible that a summer of low prevalence could be followed by substantial increases in
incidence over the following autumn and winter. Low prevalence in late summer should not
be taken as an indication that SARS-CoV-2 has retreated or that the population has high
enough levels of immunity to prevent another wave.
They are telling y ou the script and while many British people
believ ed ‘Covid’ restrictions w ould end in the summer of 2021 the
gov ernment w as preparing for them to be ongoing. Authorities w ere
aw arding contracts for ‘Covid marshals’ to police the restrictions
with contracts starting in July , 2021, and going through to January
31st, 2022, and the gov ernment w as adv ertising for ‘Media Buying
Services’ to secure media propaganda slots w orth a potential £320
million for ‘Covid-19 campaigns’ with a contract not ending until
March, 2022. The recipient – via a list of other front companies – w as
reported to be American media marketing giant Omnicom GroupInc. While money is no object for ‘Covid’ the UK w aiting list for all
other treatment – including life-threatening conditions – passed 4.5
million. Meantime the Cult is seeking to control all oﬃcial ‘inquiries’
to block rev elations about what has really been happening and why .
It must not be allow ed to – w e need Nuremberg jury trials in ev ery
country . The cov er -up doesn’ t get more obvious than appointing
ultra-Zionist professor Philip Zelikow to ov ersee tw o dozen US
virologists, public health oﬃcials, clinicians, former gov ernment
oﬃcials and four American ‘charitable foundations’ to ‘learn the
lessons’ of the ‘Covid’ debacle. The personnel will be those that
created and perpetuated the ‘Covid’ lies while Zelikow is the former
executiv e director of the 9/11 Commission who ensured that the
truth about those a acks nev er came out and produced a report that
must be among the most mendacious and manipulativ e documents
ev er wri en – see The Trigger  for the detailed exposure of the almost
unimaginable 9/11 story in which Sabbatians can be found at ev ery
lev el.
Passive no more
P eople are increasingly challenging the authorities with amazing
numbers of people taking to the streets in London w ell bey ond the
ability of the Face-Nappies to stop them. Instead the Nappies choose
situations aw ay from the mass crowds to target, intimidate, and seek
to promote the impression of ‘violent protestors’. One such incident
happened in London’ s Hyde P ark. Hundreds of thousands w alking
through the streets in protest against ‘Covid’ fascism w ere ignored
by the Cult-owned BBC and most of the rest of the mainstream
media, but they delighted in reporting how police w ere injured in
‘clashes with protestors’. The truth w as that a group of people
gathered in Hyde P ark at the end of one march when most had gone
home and they w ere peacefully having a good time with music and
chat. Face-Nappies who couldn’ t deal with the full-march crowd
then w aded in with their batons and got more than they bargained
for . Instead of just standing for this criminal brutality the crowd
used their numerical superiority to push the Face-Nappies out of thepark. Ev entually the Nappies turned and ran. Unfortunately tw o or
three idiots in the crowd threw drink cans striking tw o oﬃcers
which gav e the media and the gov ernment the image they w anted to
discredit the 99.9999 percent who w ere peaceful. The idiots w alked
straight into the trap and w e must alw ays be aw are of potential
agent prov ocateurs used by the authorities to discredit their targets.
This response from the crowd – the can people apart – must be a
turning point when the public no longer stand by while the innocent
are arrested and brutally a acked by the Face-Nappies. That doesn’ t
mean to be violent, that’ s the last thing w e need. W e’ll leav e the
violence to the Face-Nappies and gov ernment. But it does mean that
when the Face-Nappies use violence against peaceful people the
numerical superiority is employ ed to stop them and make citizen’ s
arrests or Common Law arrests for a breach of the peace. The time
for being passiv e in the face of fascism is ov er .
W e are the many , they are the few , and w e need to make that count
before there is no freedom le  and our children and grandchildren
face an ongoing fascist nightmare.
COME ON PEOPLE  – IT’S TIME.
 
One final thought …
The pow er of lov e
A force from abov e
Cleaning my soul
Flame on burn desire
Lov e with tongues of ﬁre
Purge the soul
Make lov e y our goalI’ll protect y ou from the hooded claw
Keep the v ampires from y our door
When the chips are down I’ll be around
W ith my undying, death-defying
Lov e for y ou
Envy will hurt itself
Let y ourself be beautiful
Sparkling lov e, ﬂow ers
And pearls and pre y girls
Lov e is like an energy
Rushin’ rushin’ inside of me
This time w e go sublime
Lov ers entwine, divine, divine,
Lov e is danger , lov e is pleasure
Lov e is pure – the only treasure
I’ m so in lov e with y ou
Purge the soul
Make lov e y our goal
The pow er of lov e
A force from abov e
Cleaning my soul
The pow er of lov e
A force from abov e
A sky-scraping dov eFlame on burn desire
Lov e with tongues of ﬁre
Purge the soul
Make lov e y our goal
Frankie Goes To HollywoodT
•
•
•
•A p p e n d i x
Cowan-Kaufman-Morell Statement on Virus Isolation
(SOVI)
Isolation: The action of isolating; the fact or condition of being
isolated or standing alone; separation from other things or persons;
solitariness
Oxford English Dictionary
he controv ersy ov er whether the SARS-CoV -2 virus has ev er
been isolated or puriﬁed continues. How ev er , using the abov e
deﬁnition, common sense, the laws of logic and the dictates of
science, any unbiased person must come to the conclusion that the
SARS-CoV -2 virus has nev er been isolated or puriﬁed. As a result, no
conﬁrmation of the virus’ existence can be found. The logical,
common sense, and scientiﬁc consequences of this fact are:
 
the structure and composition of something not shown to exist
can’ t be known, including the presence, structure, and function of
any hypothetical spike or other proteins;
the genetic sequence of something that has nev er been found can’ t
be known;
“v ariants” of something that hasn’ t been shown to exist can’ t be
known;
it’ s impossible to demonstrate that SARS-CoV -2 causes a disease
called Covid-19.1
2 
In as concise terms as possible, here’ s the proper w ay to isolate,
characterize and demonstrate a new virus. First, one takes samples
(blood, sputum, secretions) from many people (e.g. 500) with
symptoms which are unique and speciﬁc enough to characterize an
illness. W ithout mixing these samples with ANY tissue or products
that also contain genetic material, the virologist macerates, ﬁlters
and ultracentrifuges i.e. purifies  the specimen. This common virology
technique, done for decades to isolate bacteriophages1 and so-called
giant viruses in ev ery virology lab, then allows the virologist to
demonstrate with electron microscopy thousands of identically sized
and shaped particles. These particles are the isolated and puriﬁed
virus.
These identical particles are then checked for uniformity by
physical and/or microscopic techniques. Once the purity is
determined, the particles may be further characterized. This w ould
include examining the structure, morphology , and chemical
composition of the particles. Next, their genetic makeup is
characterized by extracting the genetic material directly from the
puriﬁed particles and using genetic-sequencing techniques, such as
Sanger sequencing, that hav e also been around for decades. Then
one does an analysis to conﬁrm that these uniform particles are
exogenous (outside) in origin as a virus is conceptualized to be, and
not the normal breakdown products of dead and dying tissues.2 (As
of May 2020, w e know that virologists hav e no w ay to determine
whether the particles they’ re seeing are viruses or just normal break-
down products of dead and dying tissues.)3
 
Isolation, characterization and analysis of bacteriophages from the haloalkaline lake Elmenteita,
KenyaJuliah Khayeli Akhwale et al, PLOS One, Published: April 25, 2019.
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0215734 – accessed 2/15/21
“Extracellular Vesicles Derived From Apoptotic Cells: An Essential Link Between Death and
Regeneration,” Maojiao Li1 et al, Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology, 2020 October 2.
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fcell.2020.573511/full – accessed 2/15/213 “The Role of Extraellular Vesicles as Allies of HIV, HCV and SARS Viruses,” Flavia Giannessi, et al,
Viruses, 2020 May
 
If w e hav e come this far then w e hav e fully isolated, characterized,
and genetically sequenced an exogenous virus particle. How ev er , w e
still hav e to show it is causally related to a disease. This is carried
out by exposing a group of healthy subjects (animals are usually
used) to this isolated, puriﬁed virus in the manner in which the
disease is thought to be transmi ed. If the animals get sick with the
same disease, as conﬁrmed by clinical and autopsy ﬁndings, one has
now shown that the virus actually causes a disease. This
demonstrates infectivity and transmission of an infectious agent.
None of these steps has ev en been a empted with the SARS-CoV -2
virus, nor hav e all these steps been successfully performed for any
so-called pathogenic virus. Our research indicates that a single study
showing these steps does not exist in the medical literature.
Instead, since 1954, virologists hav e taken unpuriﬁed samples
from a relativ ely few people, o en less than ten, with a similar
disease. They then minimally process this sample and inoculate this
unpuriﬁed sample onto tissue culture containing usually four to six
other types of material – all of which contain identical genetic
material as to what is called a “virus.” The tissue culture is starv ed
and poisoned and naturally disintegrates into many types of
particles, some of which contain genetic material. Against all
common sense, logic, use of the English language and scientiﬁc
integrity , this process is called “virus isolation.” This brew
containing fragments of genetic material from many sources is then
subjected to genetic analysis, which then creates in a computer -
simulation process the alleged sequence of the alleged virus, a so
called in silico genome. At no time is an actual virus conﬁrmed by
electron microscopy . At no time is a genome extracted and
sequenced from an actual virus. This is scientiﬁc fraud.The observ ation that the unpuriﬁed specimen — inoculated onto
tissue culture along with toxic antibiotics, bovine fetal tissue,
amniotic ﬂuid and other tissues — destroys the kidney tissue onto
which it is inoculated is giv en as evidence of the virus’ existence and
pathogenicity . This is scientiﬁc fraud.
From now on, when any one giv es y ou a paper that suggests the
SARS-CoV -2 virus has been isolated, please check the methods
sections. If the researchers used V ero cells or any other culture
method, y ou know that their process w as not isolation. Y ou will hear
the following excuses for why actual isolation isn’ t done:
1. There w ere not enough virus particles found in samples from patients to analyze.
2. V iruses are intracellular parasites; they can’ t be found outside the cell in this manner .
If No. 1 is correct, and w e can’ t ﬁnd the virus in the sputum of sick
people, then on what evidence do w e think the virus is dangerous or
ev en lethal? If No. 2 is correct, then how is the virus spread from
person to person? W e are told it emerges from the cell to infect
others. Then why isn’ t it possible to ﬁnd it?
Finally , questioning these virology techniques and conclusions is
not some distraction or divisiv e issue. Shining the light on this truth
is essential to stop this terrible fraud that humanity is confronting.
For , as w e now know , if the virus has nev er been isolated, sequenced
or shown to cause illness, if the virus is imaginary , then why are w e
w earing masks, social distancing and pu ing the whole w orld into
prison?
Finally , if pathogenic viruses don’ t exist, then what is going into
those injectable devices erroneously called “v accines,” and what is
their purpose? This scientiﬁc question is the most urgent and
relev ant one of our time.W e are correct. The SARS-CoV2 virus does not exist.
Sally Fallon Morell, MA
Dr . Thomas Cow an, MD
Dr . Andrew Kaufman, MDB i b l i o g r a p h y
Alinsky,  Saul: Rules for Radicals  (V intage, 1989)
Antelman,  Rabbi Marvin: To Eliminate the Opiate  (Zahavia, 1974)
Bastardi , Joe: The Climate Chronicles  (Relentless Thunder Press, 2018)
Cowan,  T om: Human Heart, Cosmic Heart  (Chelsea Green Publishing, 2016)
Cowan , T om, and Fallon Morell, Sally: The Contagion Myth  (Skyhorse Publishing, 2020)
Forbes,  Jack D: Columbus And Other Cannibals – The Wetiko Disease of Exploitation,
Imperialism, and Terrorism  (Sev en Stories Press, 2008 – originally published in 1979)
Gates,  Bill: How to Avoid a Climate Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We
Need  (Allen Lane, 2021)
Huxley,  Aldous: Brave New World  (Cha o & W indus, 1932)
Köhnlein,  Dr Claus, and Engelbrecht, T orsten: Virus Mania  (emu- V ertag, Lahnstein, 2020)
Lanza,  Robert, and Berman, Bob: Biocentrism  (BenBella Books, 2010)
Lash,  John Lamb: Not In His Image  (Chelsea Green Publishing, 2006)
Lester,  Dawn, and P arker , David: What Really Makes You Ill – Why everything  you thought you
knew about disease is wrong  (Independently Published, 2019)
Levy,  P aul: Dispelling Wetiko, Breaking the Spell of Evil  (North Atlantic Books, 2013)
Marx,  Karl: A World Without Jews  (Philosophical Library , ﬁrst edition, 1959)
Mullis,  Kary: Dancing Naked in the Mine Field  (Bloomsbury , 1999)
O’Brien,  Cathy: Trance-Formation of America  (Reality Marketing, 1995)
Scholem,  Gershon: The Messianic Idea in Judaism  (Schocken Books, 1994)
Schwab,  Klaus, and Davis, Nicholas: Shaping the Future of the Fourth  Industrial Revolution: A
guide to building a better world  (P enguin Books, 2018)
Schwab , Klaus: The Great Reset  (Agentur Schw eiz, 2020)
Sunstein,  Cass and Thaler , Richard: Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health,  Wealth, and
Happiness  (P enguin, 2009)
Swan,  Shanna: Count Down: How Our Modern World Is Threatening Sperm  Counts, Altering
Male and Female Reproductive Development and Imperiling the  Future of the Human Race
(Scribner , 2021)
Tegmark,  Max: Our Mathematical Universe: My Quest for the Ultimate Nature  of Reality
(P enguin, 2015)
Velikovsky,  Immanuel: Worlds in Collision  (P aradigma, 2009)Wilton,  Robert: The Last Days of the Romanovs  (Blurb, 2018, ﬁrst published 1920)I n d e x
A
abusive relationships
blaming themselv es, abused as ref1
children ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10
conspiracy theories ref1
domestic abuse ref1 , ref2
economic abuse and dependency ref1
isolation ref1
physical abuse ref1
psychological abuse ref1
signs of abuse ref1
addiction
alcoholism ref1
frequencies ref1
substance abuse ref1 , ref2
technology ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Adelson, Sheldon  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Agenda 21/Agenda 2030 (UN)  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
AIDs/HIV  ref1
causal link between HIV and AIDs  ref1 , ref2
retroviruses ref1
testing ref1 , ref2
trial-run for Covid-19, as ref1 , ref2
aliens/extraterrestrials  ref1 , ref2
aluminium  ref1
Amazon  ref1 , ref2 , ref3amplification cycles  ref1 , ref2
anaphylactic shock  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
animals  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
antibodies  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Antifa  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
antigens  ref1 , ref2
anti-Semitism  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Archons  ref1 , ref2
consciousness ref1 , ref2 , ref3
energy ref1 , ref2 , ref3
ennoia ref1
genetic manipulation ref1 , ref2
inv ersion ref1 , ref2 , ref3
lockdowns ref1
money ref1
radiation ref1
religion ref1 , ref2
technology ref1 , ref2 , ref3
W etiko factor ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
artificial intelligence (AI)  ref1
army made up of robots  ref1 , ref2
Human 2.0 ref1 , ref2
Internet ref1
MHRA ref1
Morgellons ﬁbres ref1 , ref2
Smart Grid ref1
W etiko factor ref1
asymptomatic, Covid-19  as ref1 , ref2 , ref3
aviation industry  ref1
Bbanking, finance and money  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
2008 crisis ref1 , ref2
boom and bust ref1
cashless digital money systems ref1
central banks ref1
credit ref1
digital currency ref1
fractional reserv e lending ref1
Great Reset ref1
guaranteed income ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Human 2.0 ref1
incomes, destruction of ref1 , ref2
interest ref1
one per cent ref1 , ref2
scams ref1
BBC  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
Becker-Phelps, Leslie  ref1
Behavioural Insights Team (BIT) (Nudge Unit)  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
behavioural scientists  and  psychologists, advice from  ref1 , ref2
Bezos, Jeff  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Biden, Hunter  ref1
Biden, Joe  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10 , ref11 ,
ref12 , ref13 , ref14 , ref15 , ref16 , ref17
Big Pharma
cholesterol ref1
health professionals ref1 , ref2
immunity from prosecution in US ref1
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
W etiko factor ref1 , ref2
WHO ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 ,
ref7billionaires  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9  ref10 , ref11
bird flu (H5N1)  ref1
Black Lives Matter (BLM)  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Blair, Tony  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
Brin, Sergei  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
British Empire  ref1
Bush, George HW  ref1 , ref2
Bush, George W  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Byrd, Robert  ref1
C
Canada
Global Cult ref1
hate speech ref1
internment ref1
masks ref1
old people ref1
SARS-COV -2 ref1
satellites ref1
v accines ref1
w earable technology ref1
Capitol Hill rio t ref1 , ref2
agents prov ocateur ref1
Antifa ref1
Black Liv es Ma er (BLM) ref1 , ref2
QAnon ref1
security precautions, lack of ref1 , ref2 , ref3
carbon dioxide  ref1 , ref2
care homes, deaths in  ref1 , ref2
cashless digital money systems  ref1
censorship  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5fact-checkers ref1
masks ref1
media ref1 , ref2
priv ate messages ref1
social media ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
transgender persons ref1
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3
W okeness ref1
Centers for Disease Control (CDC)  (United States) ref1 , ref2 , ref3 ,
ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10 , ref11 , ref12 , ref13
centralisation  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
chakras  ref1
change agents  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
chemtrails  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
chief medical officers and scientific advisers  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 ,
ref5 , ref6
children  see also  young people
abuse ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10
care, taken into ref1 , ref2 , ref3
education ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
energy ref1
family courts ref1
hand sanitisers ref1
human sacriﬁce ref1
lockdowns ref1 , ref2 , ref3
masks ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
mental health ref1
old people ref1
parents, replacement of ref1 , ref2
Psy op (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1 , ref2
reframing ref1
smartphone addiction ref1social distancing and isolation ref1
social media ref1
transgender persons ref1 , ref2
United States ref1
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10
W etiko factor ref1
China  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
anal sw ab tests ref1
Chinese Revolution  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
digital currency ref1
Global Cult ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9
guaranteed income ref1
Imperial College ref1
Israel ref1
lockdown ref1 , ref2
masculinity crisis ref1
masks ref1
media ref1
origins of virus in China ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
pollution causing respiratory diseases ref1
Sabbatians ref1 , ref2
Smart Grid ref1 , ref2
social credit system ref1
testing ref1 , ref2
United States ref1 , ref2
v accines ref1 , ref2
W etiko factor ref1
w et market conspiracy ref1
W uhan ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
cholesterol  ref1 , ref2
Christianity  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
criticism ref1
cross, inv ersion of the ref1Nag Hammadi texts ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Roman Catholic Church ref1 , ref2
Sabbatians ref1 , ref2
Satan ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
W okeness ref1
class  ref1 , ref2
climate change hoax  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Agenda 21/Agenda 2030 ref1 , ref2 , ref3
carbon dioxide ref1 , ref2
Club of Rome ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
fear ref1
funding ref1
Global Cult ref1
green new deals ref1
green parties ref1
inv ersion ref1
perception, control of ref1
PICC ref1
reframing ref1
temperature, increases in ref1
United Nations ref1 , ref2
W ikipedia ref1
W okeness ref1 , ref2
Clinton, Bill  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
Clinton, Hillary  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
the cloud  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
Club of Rome and climate change hoax  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
cognitive therapy  ref1
Cohn, Roy  ref1
Common Law  ref1
Admiralty Law ref1
arrests ref1 , ref2contractual law , Statute Law as ref1
corporate entities, people as ref1
legalese ref1
sea, law of the ref1
Statute Law ref1
Common Purpose leadership programme  ref1 , ref2
communism  ref1 , ref2
co-morbidities  ref1
computer-generated virus,
Covid-19  as ref1 , ref2 , ref3
computer models  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
connections  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
consciousness  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Archons ref1 , ref2 , ref3
expanded ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
experience ref1
heart ref1
inﬁnity ref1 , ref2
religion ref1 , ref2
self-identity ref1
simulation thesis ref1
v accines ref1
W etiko factor ref1 , ref2
conspiracy theorists  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
contradictory rules  ref1
contrails  ref1
Corman-Drosten test  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
countermimicry  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Covid-19 vaccines  see  v accines
Covidiots  ref1 , ref2
Cowan, Tom  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
crimes against humanity  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8cyber-operations  ref1
cyberwarfare  ref1
D
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency)  ref1
deaths
care homes ref1
certiﬁcates ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
mortality rate ref1
post-mortems/autopsies ref1
recording ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
deceit
pyramid of deceit ref1 , ref2
sequence of deceit ref1
decoding  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
dehumanisation  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Delphi technique  ref1
democracy  ref1
dependency  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Descartes, René  ref1
DNA
numbers ref1
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10
DNR  (do not resuscitate)
orders ref1
domestic abuse  ref1 , ref2
downgrading of Covid-19  ref1
Drosten, Christian  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
Duesberg, Peter  ref1 , ref2E
economic abuse  ref1
Edmunds, John  ref1 , ref2
education  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
electromagnetic spectrum  ref1 , ref2
Enders, John  ref1
energy
Archons ref1 , ref2 , ref3
children and y oung people ref1
consciousness ref1
decoding ref1
frequencies ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
heart ref1
human energy ﬁeld ref1
source, humans as an energy ref1 , ref2
v accines ref1
viruses ref1
ennoia  ref1
Epstein, Jeffrey  ref1 , ref2
eternal ‘I’  ref1 , ref2
ethylene oxide  ref1
European Union  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Event ref1  and  Bill Gates  ref2
exosomes , Covid-19 as natural defence mechanism called ref1
experience  ref1 , ref2
Extinction Rebellion  ref1 , ref2
F
Facebook
addiction ref1 , 448–50
FacebookArchons ref1
censorship ref1 , ref2 , ref3
hate speech ref1
monopoly , as ref1
priv ate messages, censorship of ref1
Sabbatians ref1
United States election fraud ref1
v accines ref1
W etiko factor ref1
fact-checkers  ref1
Fauci, Anthony  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10 ,
ref11 , ref12
fear  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
climate change ref1
computer models ref1
conspiracy theories ref1
empty hospitals ref1
Italy ref1 , ref2 , ref3
lockdowns ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
masks ref1 , ref2
media ref1 , ref2
medical staﬀ ref1
Psy op (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
W etiko factor ref1 , ref2
female infertility  ref1
Fermi Paradox  ref1
Ferguson, Nei l ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
fertility, decline in  ref1
The Field  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
finance  see  banking, finance and money
five-senses  ref1 , ref2
Archons ref1 , ref2 , ref3censorship ref1
consciousness, expansion of ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
decoding ref1
education ref1 , ref2
the Field ref1 , ref2
God, personiﬁcation of ref1
inﬁnity ref1 , ref2
media ref1
paranormal ref1
perceptual programming ref1 , ref2
Phantom Self ref1
pneuma not nous, using ref1
reincarnation ref1
self-identity ref1
W etiko factor ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
5G  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
Floyd, George and protests, killing  of ref1
flu, re-labelling of  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
food and water, control of  ref1 , ref2
Freemasons  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
Frei, Rosemary  ref1
frequencies
addictions ref1
Archons ref1 , ref2 , ref3
aw areness ref1
chanting and mantras ref1
consciousness ref1
decoding ref1 , ref2
education ref1
electromagnetic (EMF) frequencies ref1
energy ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
fear ref1the Field ref1 , ref2  5G ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10
ﬁv e-senses ref1 , ref2
ghosts ref1
Gnostics ref1
hiv e-minds ref1
human, meaning of ref1
light ref1 , ref2
lov e ref1 , ref2
magnetism ref1
perception ref1
reality ref1 , ref2 , ref3
simulation ref1
terror ref1
v accines ref1
W etiko ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Fuellmich, Reiner  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
furlough/rescue payments  ref1
G
Gallo, Robert  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Gates, Bill
Archons ref1 , ref2 , ref3
climate change ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Daily P ass tracking system ref1
Epstein ref1
fascism ref1
ﬁv e senses ref1
GA VI ref1
Great Reset ref1
GSK ref1
Imperial College ref1 , ref2
Johns Hopkins Univ ersity ref1 , ref2 , ref3lockdowns ref1 , ref2
masks ref1
Nuremberg trial, proposal for ref1 , ref2
Rockefellers ref1 , ref2
social distancing and isolation ref1
Sun, dimming the ref1
synthetic meat ref1 , ref2
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
W ellcome T rust ref1
W etiko factor ref1 , ref2 , ref3
WHO ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10
W okeness ref1
W orld Economic Forum ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Gates, Melinda  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
GAVI vaccine alliance  ref1
genetics, manipulation of  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Germany  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6  see also  Nazi Germany
Global Cult  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
anti-human, why Global Cult is ref1
Black Liv es Ma er (BLM) ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
China ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9
climate change hoax ref1
contradictory rules ref1
Covid-19 ref1 , ref2 , ref3
fascism ref1
geographical origins ref1
immigration ref1
Internet ref1
mainstream media ref1 , ref2
masks ref1 , ref2
monarchy ref1
non-human dimension ref1perception ref1
political parties ref1 , ref2
pyramidal hierarchy ref1 , ref2 , ref3
reframing ref1
Sabbantian-Frankism ref1 , ref2
science, manipulation of ref1
spider and the w eb ref1
transgender persons ref1
v accines ref1
who controls the Cult ref1
W okeness ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
globalisation  ref1 , ref2
Gnostics  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Google  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
government
behavioural scientists and psychologists, advice from ref1 , ref2
deﬁnition ref1
Joint Biosecurity Centre ( JBC) ref1
people, abusiv e relationship with ref1
Great Reset  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
fascism ref1 , ref2 , ref3
ﬁnancial system ref1
Human 2.0 ref1
w ater and food, control of ref1
green parties  ref1
Griesz-Brisson, Margarite  ref1
guaranteed income  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
H
Hancock, Matt  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
hand sanitisers  ref1
heart  ref1 , ref2hive-minds/groupthink  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
holographs  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
hospitals, empty  ref1
human, meaning o f ref1
Human 2.0  ref1
addiction to technology ref1
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1 , ref2
elimination of Human 1.0 ref1
fertility , decline in ref1
Great Reset ref1
implantables ref1
money ref1
mRNA ref1
nanotechnology ref1
parents, replacement of ref1 , ref2
Smart Grid, connection to ref1 , ref2
synthetic biology ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
testosterone lev els, decrease in ref1
transgender = transhumanism ref1 , ref2 , ref3
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
human sacrifice  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Hunger Games Society  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
Huxley, Aldous  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
I
identity politics  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Illuminati  ref1 , ref2
illusory physical reality  ref1
immigration  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Imperial College  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
implantables  ref1 , ref2incomes, destruction of  ref1 , ref2
Infinite Awareness  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Internet  ref1 , ref2  see also  social media
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1
independent journalism, lack of ref1
Internet of Bodies (IoB) ref1
Internet of Everything (IoE)  ref1 , ref2
Internet of Things (IoT)  ref1 , ref2
lockdowns  ref1
Psy op (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
trolls ref1
intersectionality  ref1
inversion
Archons ref1 , ref2 , ref3
climate change hoax ref1
energy ref1
Judaism ref1 , ref2 , ref3
symbolism ref1
W etiko factor ref1
W okeness ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Islam
Archons ref1
crypto-Jews ref1
Islamic State ref1 , ref2
Jinn and Djinn ref1 , ref2 , ref3
O oman Empire ref1
W ahhabism ref1
isolation  see  social distancing  and  isolation
Israel
China ref1
Cyber Intelligence Unit Beersheba complex ref1
expansion of illegal se lements ref1formation ref1
Global Cult ref1
Judaism ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
medical experiments, consent for ref1
Mossad ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
P alestine-Israel conﬂict ref1 , ref2 , ref3
parents, replacement of ref1
Sabbatians ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
September 11, 2001, terrorist a acks on United States ref1
Silicon V alley ref1
Smart Grid ref1 , ref2
United States ref1 , ref2
v accines ref1
W etiko factor ref1
Italy
fear ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Lombardy ref1 , ref2 , ref3
v accines ref1
J
Johns Hopkins University  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
Johnson, Boris  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
Joint Biosecurity Centre (JBC)  ref1
Judaism
anti-Semitism ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Archons ref1 , ref2
crypto-Jews ref1
inv ersion ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Israel ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Labour P arty ref1
Nazi Germany ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Sabbatians ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5Silicon V alley ref1
T orah ref1
United States ref1 , ref2
Zionists ref1 , ref2 , ref3
K
Kaufman, Andrew  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
knowledge  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
Koch’s postulates  ref1
Kurzweil, Ray  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
Kushner, Jared ref1, ref2
L
Labour Party  ref1 , ref2
Lanka, Stefan  ref1 , ref2
Lateral Flow Device (LFD)  ref1
Levy, Paul  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Life Program  ref1
lockdowns  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
ampliﬁcation tampering ref1
Archons ref1
Behavioural Insights T eam ref1
Black Liv es Ma er (BLM) ref1
care homes, deaths in ref1
children
abuse ref1 , ref2
mental health ref1
China ref1 , ref2
computer models ref1
consequences ref1 , ref2
dependency ref1 , ref2 , ref3domestic abuse ref1
fall in cases ref1
fear ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
guaranteed income ref1
Hunger Games Society ref1 , ref2 , ref3
interaction, destroying ref1
Internet ref1 , ref2
ov erdoses ref1
perception ref1
police-military state ref1 , ref2
protests ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
psychopathic personality ref1 , ref2 , ref3
reporting/snitching, encouragement of ref1 , ref2
testing ref1
v accines ref1
W etiko factor ref1
WHO ref1
love  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Lucifer  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
M
Madej, Carrie  ref1 , ref2
Magufuli, John  ref1 , ref2
mainstream media  ref1
BBC ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
censorship ref1 , ref2
China ref1
climate change hoax ref1
fear ref1 , ref2
Global Cult ref1 , ref2
independent journalism, lack of ref1
Ofcom ref1 , ref2 , ref3perception ref1 , ref2
Psy op (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
Sabbatians ref1 , ref2
social disapprov al ref1
social distancing and isolation ref1
United States ref1 , ref2
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Mao Zedong  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Marx and Marxism  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
masculinity  ref1
masks/face coverings  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
censorship ref1
children ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
China, made in ref1
dehumanisation ref1 , ref2 , ref3
fear ref1 , ref2
ﬂu ref1
health professionals ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
isolation ref1
laughter ref1
mass non-cooperation  ref1
microplastics, risk of  ref1
mind control  ref1
multiple masks  ref1
oxygen deﬁciency ref1 , ref2 , ref3
police ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
pollution, as cause of plastic ref1
Psy op (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
reframing ref1 , ref2
risk assessments, lack of ref1 , ref2
self-respect ref1
surgeons ref1United States ref1
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
W etiko factor ref1
‘w orms’ ref1
The Matrix  movies ref1 , ref2 , ref3
measles ref1 , ref2
media see mainstream media
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)
ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Mesopotamia  ref1
messaging  ref1
military-police state  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
mind control  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6  see also  MKUltra
MKUltra ref1 , ref2 , ref3
monarchy ref1
money  see  banking, finance and money
Montagnier,  Luc ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Mooney, Bel  ref1
Morgellons disease  ref1 , ref2
mortality rate  ref1
Mullis, Kary  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Musk, Elon  ref1
N
Nag Hammadi texts  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
nanotechnology  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
narcissism  ref1
Nazi Germany  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
near-death experiences  ref1 , ref2
Neocons  ref1 , ref2 , ref3Neuro-Linguistic  Programming (NLP) and the Delphi technique
ref1
NHS (National Health Service)
ampliﬁcation cycles ref1
Common Purpose ref1 , ref2
mind control ref1
NHS England  ref1
saving the NHS ref1 , ref2
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
whistle-blow ers ref1 , ref2 , ref3
No-Problem-Reaction-Solution  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
non-human dimension of Global Cult  ref1
nous  ref1
numbers, reality as  ref1
Nuremberg Codes  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Nuremberg-like tribunal, proposal for  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 ,
ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10 , ref11 , ref12
O
Obama, Barack  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10
O’Brien, Cathy  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Ochel, Evita  ref1
Ofcom  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
old people  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Oneness  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Open Society Foundations  (Soros)  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
oxygen  406, 528–34
P
paedophilia  ref1 , ref2
Page, Larry  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7Palestine-Israel conflict  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
pandemic, definition of  ref1
pandemic and health crisis scenarios/simulations  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 ,
ref4
paranormal  ref1
PCR tests  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
Pearl Harbor attacks, prior knowledge of  ref1
Pelosi, Nancy  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
perception  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
climate change hoax ref1
control ref1 , ref2 , ref3
decoding ref1 , ref2
enslav ement ref1
externally-deliv ered perceptions ref1
ﬁv e senses ref1
human labels ref1
media ref1 , ref2
political parties ref1 , ref2
Psy op (psychological operation), Covid as a ref1
sale of perception ref1
self-identity ref1 , ref2
W okeness ref1
Phantom Self  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
pharmaceutical industry  see  Big Pharma
phthalates  ref1
Plato’s Allegory of the Cave  ref1 , ref2
pneuma  ref1
police
Black Liv es Ma er (BLM) ref1
brutality ref1
citizen’ s arrests ref1 , ref2
common law arrests ref1 , ref2Common Purpose ref1
defunding ref1
lockdowns ref1 , ref2
masks ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
police-military state ref1 , ref2 , ref3
psychopathic personality ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
reframing ref1
United States ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
W okeness ref1
polio  ref1
political correctness  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
political parties  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
political puppets  ref1
pollution  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
post-mortems/autopsies  ref1
Postage Stamp Consensus  ref1 , ref2
pre-emptive programming  ref1
Problem-Reaction-Solution  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
Project for the New American Century  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
psychopathic personality  ref1
Archons ref1
heart energy ref1
lockdowns ref1 , ref2 , ref3
police ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
recruitment ref1 , ref2
v accines ref1
w ealth ref1
W etiko ref1 , ref2
Psyop (psychological operation), Covid as a  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 ,
ref5
Pushbackers  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
pyramid structure  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4Q
QAnon Psyop  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
R
racism  see also  Black Lives
Ma er (BLM)
anti-racism industry ref1
class ref1
critical race theory ref1
culture ref1
intersectionality ref1
rev erse racism ref1
white privilege ref1 , ref2
white supremacy ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
W okeness ref1 , ref2 , ref3
radiation  ref1 , ref2
randomness, illusion of  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
reality  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
reframing  ref1 , ref2
change agents ref1 , ref2
children ref1
climate change ref1
Common Purpose leadership programme ref1 , ref2
contradictory rules ref1
enforcers ref1
masks ref1 , ref2
NLP and the Delphi technique ref1
police ref1
W etiko factor ref1
W okeness ref1 , ref2
religion see also  particular religions
alien inv asions ref1Archons ref1 , ref2
consciousness ref1 , ref2
control, system of ref1 , ref2 , ref3
criticism, prohibition on ref1
ﬁv e senses ref1
good and evil, w ar betw een ref1
hidden non-human forces ref1 , ref2
Sabbatians ref1
sav e me syndrome ref1
W etiko ref1
W okeness ref1
repetition and mind control  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
reporting/snitching, encouragement of  ref1 , ref2
Reptilians/Grey entities  ref1
rewiring the mind  ref1
Rivers, Thomas Milton  ref1 , ref2
Rockefeller family  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9
Rockefeller Foundation documents  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Roman Empire  ref1
Rothschild family  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9
RT-PCR tests  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
Russia
collusion inquiry in US ref1
Russian Revolution  ref1 , ref2
Sabbatians ref1
S
Sabbantian-Frankism  ref1 , ref2
anti-Semitism ref1 , ref2
banking and ﬁnance ref1 , ref2 , ref3
China ref1 , ref2
Israel ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5Judaism ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Lucifer ref1
media ref1 , ref2
Nazis ref1 , ref2
QAnon ref1
Rothschilds ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
Russia ref1
Saudi Arabia ref1
Silicon V alley ref1
Sumer ref1
United States ref1 , ref2 , ref3
W etiko factor ref1
W okeness ref1 , ref2 , ref3
SAGE (Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies)  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 ,
ref4
SARS-1  ref1
SARs-CoV-2  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
Satan/Satanism  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
satellites in low-orbit  ref1
Saudi Arabia  ref1
Save Me Syndrome  ref1
scapegoating  ref1
Schwab, Klaus  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10 ,
ref11 , ref12
science, manipulation of  ref1
self-identity  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
self-respect, attacks on  ref1
September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on United States  ref1 , ref2 ,
ref3 , ref4
77th Brigade of UK military  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Silicon Valley/tech giants  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6  see also
FacebookIsrael ref1
Sabbatians ref1
technocracy ref1
W etiko factor ref1
W okeness ref1
simulation hypothesis  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Smart Grid  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1
China ref1 , ref2
control centres ref1
the Field ref1
Great Reset ref1
Human 2.0 ref1 , ref2
Israel ref1 , ref2
v accines ref1
W etiko factor ref1
social disapproval  ref1
social distancing  and  isolation  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
abusiv e relationships ref1 , ref2
children ref1
ﬂats and apartments ref1
heart issues ref1
hugs ref1
Internet ref1
masks ref1
media ref1
older people ref1 , ref2
one-metre (three feet) rule ref1
rewiring the mind ref1
simulation, universe as a  ref1
SPI-B  ref1
substance abuse ref1suicide and self-harm ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
technology ref1
torture, as ref1 , ref2
tw o-metre (six feet) rule ref1
w omen ref1
social justice  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
social media  see also  Facebook bans on alternative views  ref1
censorship ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
children ref1
emotion ref1
perception ref1
priv ate messages ref1
T wi er ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
W etiko factor ref1
Y ouT ube ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Soros, George  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
Spain  ref1
SPI-B (Scientific Pandemic Insights Group on Behaviours)  ref1 ,
ref2 , ref3 , ref4
spider and the web  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Starmer, Keir  ref1
Statute Law  ref1
Steiner, Rudolf  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Stockholm syndrome  ref1
streptomycin  ref1
suicide and self-harm  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Sumer  ref1 , ref2
Sunstein, Cass  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
swine flu (H1N1)  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
synchronicity  ref1
synthetic biology  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
synthetic meat  ref1 , ref2T
technology  see also  artificial intelligence (AI); Internet;
social media addiction ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Archons ref1 , ref2
the cloud ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
cyber -operations ref1
cyberw arfare ref1
radiation ref1 , ref2
social distancing and isolation ref1
technocracy ref1
Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 ,
ref8 , ref9 , ref10 , ref11 , ref12 , ref13
telepathy  ref1
Tenpenny, Sherri  ref1
Tesla, Nikola  ref1
testosterone levels, decrease in  ref1
testing for Covid-19  ref1 , ref2
anal sw ab tests ref1
cancer ref1
China ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Corman-Drosten test ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
death certiﬁcates ref1 , ref2
fraudulent testing ref1
genetic material, ampliﬁcation of ref1
Lateral Flow Device (LFD) ref1
PCR tests ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Thunberg, Greta  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Totalitarian Tiptoe  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
transgender persons
activism ref1
artiﬁcial w ombs ref1censorship ref1
child abuse ref1 , ref2
Human 2.0 ref1 , ref2 , ref3
W okeness ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
w omen, deletion of rights and status of ref1 , ref2
y oung persons ref1
travel restrictions  ref1
Trudeau, Justin  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Trump, Donald  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10 ,
ref11
Twitter ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7
U
UKColumn  ref1 , ref2
United Nations (UN)  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5  see also  Agenda
21/Agenda 2030 (UN)
United States  ref1 , ref2
American Rev olution ref1
borders ref1 , ref2
Capitol Hill riot ref1 , ref2
children ref1
China ref1 , ref2
CIA ref1 , ref2
Daily P ass tracking system ref1
demographics by immigration, changes in ref1
Democrats ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
election fraud ref1
far -right domestic terrorists, pushbackers as ref1
Federal Reserv e ref1
ﬂu/respiratory diseases statistics ref1
Global Cult ref1 , ref2
hand sanitisers, FDA w arnings on ref1immigration, eﬀects of illegal ref1
impeachment ref1
Israel ref1 , ref2
Judaism ref1 , ref2 , ref3
lockdown ref1
masks ref1
mass media ref1 , ref2
nursing homes ref1
P entagon ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
police ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
pushbackers ref1
Republicans ref1 , ref2
borders ref1 , ref2
Democrats ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Russia, inquiry into collusion with ref1
Sabbatians ref1 , ref2 , ref3
September 11, 2001, terrorist a acks ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
UFO sightings, release of information on ref1
v accines ref1
white supremacy ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
W oke Democrats ref1 , ref2
V
vaccines  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
adv erse reactions ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Africa ref1
anaphylactic shock ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
animals ref1 , ref2
anti-v ax mov ement ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
AstraZeneca/Oxford ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
autoimmune diseases, rise in ref1 , ref2
Big Pharma ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8biow eapon, as real ref1 , ref2
black and ethnic minority communities ref1
blood clots ref1 , ref2
Brain Computer Interface (BCI) ref1
care homes, deaths in ref1
censorship ref1 , ref2 , ref3
chief medical oﬃcers and scientiﬁc advisers, ﬁnancial interests of
ref1 , ref2
children ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 , ref10
China ref1 , ref2
clinical trials ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
compensation ref1
compulsory v accinations ref1 , ref2 , ref3
computer programs ref1
consciousness ref1
cov er -ups ref1
creation before Covid ref1
cytokine storm ref1
deaths and illnesses caused by v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
deﬁnition ref1
dev eloping countries ref1
digital ta oos ref1
DNA-manipulation ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 ,
ref10
emergency approv al ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
female infertility ref1
funding ref1
genetic suicide ref1
Global Cult ref1
heart chakras ref1
hesitancy ref1
Human 2.0 ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
immunity from prosecution ref1 , ref2 , ref3implantable technology ref1
Israel ref1
Johnson & Johnson ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
lockdowns ref1
long-term eﬀects ref1
mainstream media ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
masks ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA)
ref1 , ref2
messaging ref1
Moderna ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
mRNA v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9
nanotechnology ref1 , ref2
NHS ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
older people ref1 , ref2
operating system ref1
passports ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Pﬁzer/BioNT ech ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
poly ethylene glycol ref1
pregnant w omen ref1
psychopathic personality ref1
races, targeting diﬀerent ref1
rev erse transcription ref1
Smart Grid ref1
social distancing ref1
social media ref1
sterility ref1
synthetic material, introduction of ref1
tests ref1 , ref2 , ref3
trav el restrictions ref1
variants  ref1 , ref2
viruses, existence of  ref1
whistle-blowing ref1WHO ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
W okeness ref1
w orking, v accine as ref1
y oung people ref1
Vallance, Patrick  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9
variants  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
vegans  ref1
ventilators  ref1 , ref2
virology  ref1 , ref2
virtual reality  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
viruses, existence of  ref1
visual reality  ref1 , ref2
vitamin D  ref1 , ref2
von Braun, Wernher  ref1 , ref2
W
war-zone hospital myths  ref1
waveforms  ref1 , ref2
wealth  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9  ref10 , ref11
wet market conspiracy  ref1
Wetiko factor  ref1
alcoholism and drug addiction ref1
anti-human, why Global Cult is ref1
Archons ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) ref1
Big Pharma ref1 , ref2
children ref1
China ref1
consciousness ref1 , ref2
education ref1
Facebook ref1fear ref1 , ref2
frequency ref1 , ref2
Gates ref1 , ref2
Global Cult ref1 , ref2
heart ref1 , ref2
lockdowns ref1
masks ref1
Nativ e American concept ref1
psychopathic personality ref1 , ref2
reframing/retraining programmes ref1
religion ref1
Silicon V alley ref1
Smart Grid ref1
smartphone addiction ref1 , ref2
social media ref1
w ar ref1 , ref2
WHO ref1
W okeness ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Y aldabaoth ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
whistle-blowing  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
white privilege  ref1 , ref2
white supremacy  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
Whitty, Christopher  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 ,
ref10
‘who benefits’  ref1
Wi-Fi  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Wikipedia  ref1 , ref2
Wojcicki, Susan  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7
Wokeness
Antifa ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
anti-Semitism ref1
billionaire social justice w arriors ref1 , ref2 , ref3Capitol Hill riot ref1 , ref2
censorship ref1
Christianity ref1
climate change hoax ref1 , ref2
culture ref1
education, control of ref1
emotion ref1
f acts ref1
fascism ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Global Cult ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
group-think ref1
immigration ref1
indigenous people, solidarity with ref1
inv ersion ref1 , ref2 , ref3
le , hĳacking the ref1 , ref2
Marxism ref1 , ref2 , ref3
mind control ref1
New W oke ref1
Old W oke ref1
Oneness ref1
perceptual programming ref1
Phantom Self ref1
police ref1
defunding the ref1
reframing ref1
public institutions ref1
Pushbackers ref1 , ref2 , ref3
racism ref1 , ref2 , ref3
reframing ref1 , ref2
religion, as ref1
Sabbatians ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Silicon V alley ref1
social justice ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4transgender ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
United States ref1 , ref2
v accines ref1
W etiko factor ref1 , ref2 , ref3
y oung people ref1 , ref2 , ref3
women, deletion of rights and status of  ref1 , ref2
World Economic Forum  (WEF)  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 ,
ref8 , ref9
World Health Organization  (WHO)  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 ,
ref7 , ref8 , ref9
AIDs/HIV ref1
ampliﬁcation cycles ref1
Big Pharma ref1 , ref2 , ref3
cooperation in health emergencies ref1
creation ref1 , ref2
fatality rate ref1
funding ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Gates ref1
Internet ref1
lockdown ref1
v accines ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
Wetiko factor  ref1
world number 1 (masses)  ref1 , ref2
world number 2  ref1
Wuhan ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7  ref8
Y
Yaldabaoth  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6
Yeadon, Michael  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4
young people  see also  children  addiction to technology ref1
Human 2.0 ref1
v accines ref1 , ref2W okeness ref1 , ref2 , ref3
YouTube  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5
WHO 548
Z
Zaks, Tal  ref1
Zionism  ref1 , ref2 , ref3
Zuckerberg, Mark  ref1 , ref2 , ref3 , ref4 , ref5 , ref6 , ref7 , ref8 , ref9 ,
ref10 , ref11 , ref12
Zulus  ref1Before you go …
For more detail, background and evidence about the subjects in
Perceptions of a Renegade Mind  – and so much more – see my
others books including And The Truth Shall Set You Free; The
Biggest Secret; Children of the Matrix; The David Icke Guide to the
Global Conspiracy; Tales from the Time Loop; The Perception
Deception; Remember Who You Are; Human Race Get Off Your
Knees; Phantom Self; Everything You Need To Know But Have Never
Been Told, The Trigger and The Answer .
Y ou can subscribe to the fantastic new Ickonic media platform
where there are many hundreds of hours of cu ing-edge
information in videos, documentaries and series across a whole
range of subjects which are added to ev ery w eek. This includes
my 90 minute breakdown of the w eek’ s news ev ery Friday to
explain why  ev ents are happening and to what end.